Thank you! Oh, thank you all! Thank you so very, very much.
It is wonderful to be here with all of you.
To be in New York with my family, with so many friends, including many New Yorkers who gave me the honor of serving them in the Senate for eight years.
To be right across the water from the headquarters of the United Nations, where I represented our country many times.
To be here in this beautiful park dedicated to Franklin Roosevelt’s enduring vision of America, the nation we want to be.
And in a place… with absolutely no ceilings.
You know, President Roosevelt’s Four Freedoms are a testament to our nation’s unmatched aspirations and a reminder of our unfinished work at home and abroad. His legacy lifted up a nation and inspired presidents who followed. One is the man I served as Secretary of State, Barack Obama, and another is my husband, Bill Clinton.
Two Democrats guided by the — Oh, that will make him so happy. They were and are two Democrats guided by the fundamental American belief that real and lasting prosperity must be built by all and shared by all.
President Roosevelt called on every American to do his or her part, and every American answered. He said there’s no mystery about what it takes to build a strong and prosperous America: “Equality of opportunity… Jobs for those who can work… Security for those who need it… The ending of special privilege for the few… The preservation of civil liberties for all… a wider and constantly rising standard of living.”
That still sounds good to me.
It’s America’s basic bargain. If you do your part you ought to be able to get ahead. And when everybody does their part, America gets ahead too.
That bargain inspired generations of families, including my own.
It’s what kept my grandfather going to work in the same Scranton lace mill every day for 50 years.
It’s what led my father to believe that if he scrimped and saved, his small business printing drapery fabric in Chicago could provide us with a middle-class life. And it did.
When President Clinton honored the bargain, we had the longest peacetime expansion in history, a balanced budget, and the first time in decades we all grew together, with the bottom 20 percent of workers increasing their incomes by the same percentage as the top 5 percent.
When President Obama honored the bargain, we pulled back from the brink of Depression, saved the auto industry, provided health care to 16 million working people, and replaced the jobs we lost faster than after a financial crash.
But, it’s not 1941, or 1993, or even 2009. We face new challenges in our economy and our democracy.
We’re still working our way back from a crisis that happened because time-tested values were replaced by false promises.
Instead of an economy built by every American, for every American, we were told that if we let those at the top pay lower taxes and bend the rules, their success would trickle down to everyone else.
What happened?
Well, instead of a balanced budget with surpluses that could have eventually paid off our national debt, the Republicans twice cut taxes for the wealthiest, borrowed money from other countries to pay for two wars, and family incomes dropped. You know where we ended up.
Except it wasn’t the end.
As we have since our founding, Americans made a new beginning.
You worked extra shifts, took second jobs, postponed home repairs… you figured out how to make it work. And now people are beginning to think about their future again – going to college, starting a business, buying a house, finally being able to put away something for retirement.
So we’re standing again. But, we all know we’re not yet running the way America should.
You see corporations making record profits, with CEOs making record pay, but your paychecks have barely budged.
While many of you are working multiple jobs to make ends meet, you see the top 25 hedge fund managers making more than all of America’s kindergarten teachers combined. And, often paying a lower tax rate.
So, you have to wonder: “When does my hard work pay off? When does my family get ahead?”
“When?”
I say now.
Prosperity can’t be just for CEOs and hedge fund managers.
Democracy can’t be just for billionaires and corporations.
Prosperity and democracy are part of your basic bargain too.
You brought our country back.
Now it’s time — your time to secure the gains and move ahead.
And, you know what?
America can’t succeed unless you succeed.
That is why I am running for President of the United States.
Here, on Roosevelt Island, I believe we have a continuing rendezvous with destiny. Each American and the country we cherish.
I’m running to make our economy work for you and for every American.
For the successful and the struggling.
For the innovators and inventors.
For those breaking barriers in technology and discovering cures for diseases.
For the factory workers and food servers who stand on their feet all day.
For the nurses who work the night shift.
For the truckers who drive for hours and the farmers who feed us.
For the veterans who served our country.
For the small business owners who took a risk.
For everyone who’s ever been knocked down, but refused to be knocked out.
I’m not running for some Americans, but for all Americans.
Our country’s challenges didn’t begin with the Great Recession and they won’t end with the recovery.
For decades, Americans have been buffeted by powerful currents.
Advances in technology and the rise of global trade have created whole new areas of economic activity and opened new markets for our exports, but they have also displaced jobs and undercut wages for millions of Americans.
The financial industry and many multi-national corporations have created huge wealth for a few by focusing too much on short-term profit and too little on long-term value… too much on complex trading schemes and stock buybacks, too little on investments in new businesses, jobs, and fair compensation.
Our political system is so paralyzed by gridlock and dysfunction that most Americans have lost confidence that anything can actually get done. And they’ve lost trust in the ability of both government and Big Business to change course.
Now, we can blame historic forces beyond our control for some of this, but the choices we’ve made as a nation, leaders and citizens alike, have also played a big role.
Our next President must work with Congress and every other willing partner across our entire country. And I will do just that — to turn the tide so these currents start working for us more than against us.
At our best, that’s what Americans do. We’re problem solvers, not deniers. We don’t hide from change, we harness it.
But we can’t do that if we go back to the top-down economic policies that failed us before.
Americans have come too far to see our progress ripped away.
Now, there may be some new voices in the presidential Republican choir, but they’re all singing the same old song…
A song called “Yesterday.”
You know the one — all our troubles look as though they’re here to stay… and we need a place to hide away… They believe in yesterday.
And you’re lucky I didn’t try singing that, too, I’ll tell you!
These Republicans trip over themselves promising lower taxes for the wealthy and fewer rules for the biggest corporations without regard for how that will make income inequality even worse.
We’ve heard this tune before. And we know how it turns out.
Ask many of these candidates about climate change, one of the defining threats of our time, and they’ll say: “I’m not a scientist.” Well, then, why don’t they start listening to those who are?
They pledge to wipe out tough rules on Wall Street, rather than rein in the banks that are still too risky, courting future failures. In a case that can only be considered mass amnesia.
They want to take away health insurance from more than 16 million Americans without offering any credible alternative.
They shame and blame women, rather than respect our right to make our own reproductive health decisions.
They want to put immigrants, who work hard and pay taxes, at risk of deportation.
And they turn their backs on gay people who love each other.
Fundamentally, they reject what it takes to build an inclusive economy. It takes an inclusive society. What I once called “a village” that has a place for everyone.
Now, my values and a lifetime of experiences have given me a different vision for America.
I believe that success isn’t measured by how much the wealthiest Americans have, but by how many children climb out of poverty…
How many start-ups and small businesses open and thrive…
How many young people go to college without drowning in debt…
How many people find a good job…
How many families get ahead and stay ahead.
I didn’t learn this from politics. I learned it from my own family.
My mother taught me that everybody needs a chance and a champion. She knew what it was like not to have either one.
Her own parents abandoned her, and by 14 she was out on her own, working as a housemaid. Years later, when I was old enough to understand, I asked what kept her going.
You know what her answer was? Something very simple: Kindness from someone who believed she mattered.
The 1st grade teacher who saw she had nothing to eat at lunch and, without embarrassing her, brought extra food to share.
The woman whose house she cleaned letting her go to high school so long as her work got done. That was a bargain she leapt to accept.
And, because some people believed in her, she believed in me.
That’s why I believe with all my heart in America and in the potential of every American.
To meet every challenge.
To be resilient… no matter what the world throws at you.
To solve the toughest problems.
I believe we can do all these things because I’ve seen it happen.
As a young girl, I signed up at my Methodist Church to babysit the children of Mexican farmworkers, while their parents worked in the fields on the weekends. And later, as a law student, I advocated for Congress to require better working and living conditions for farm workers whose children deserved better opportunities.
My first job out of law school was for the Children’s Defense Fund. I walked door-to-door to find out how many children with disabilities couldn’t go to school, and to help build the case for a law guaranteeing them access to education.
As a leader of the Legal Services Corporation, I defended the right of poor people to have a lawyer. And saw lives changed because an abusive marriage ended or an illegal eviction stopped.
In Arkansas, I supervised law students who represented clients in courts and prisons, organized scholarships for single parents going to college, led efforts for better schools and health care, and personally knew the people whose lives were improved.
As Senator, I had the honor of representing brave firefighters, police officers, EMTs, construction workers, and volunteers who ran toward danger on 9/11 and stayed there, becoming sick themselves.
It took years of effort, but Congress finally approved the health care they needed.
There are so many faces and stories that I carry with me of people who gave their best and then needed help themselves.
Just weeks ago, I met another person like that, a single mom juggling a job and classes at community college, while raising three kids.
She doesn’t expect anything to come easy. But she did ask me: What more can be done so it isn’t quite so hard for families like hers?
I want to be her champion and your champion.
If you’ll give me the chance, I’ll wage and win Four Fights for you.
The first is to make the economy work for everyday Americans, not just those at the top.
To make the middle class mean something again, with rising incomes and broader horizons. And to give the poor a chance to work their way into it.
The middle class needs more growth and more fairness. Growth and fairness go together. For lasting prosperity, you can’t have one without the other.
Is this possible in today’s world?
I believe it is or I wouldn’t be standing here.
Do I think it will be easy? Of course not.
But, here’s the good news: There are allies for change everywhere who know we can’t stand by while inequality increases, wages stagnate, and the promise of America dims. We should welcome the support of all Americans who want to go forward together with us.
There are public officials who know Americans need a better deal.
Business leaders who want higher pay for employees, equal pay for women and no discrimination against the LGBT community either.
There are leaders of finance who want less short-term trading and more long-term investing.
There are union leaders who are investing their own pension funds in putting people to work to build tomorrow’s economy. We need everyone to come to the table and work with us.
In the coming weeks, I’ll propose specific policies to:
Reward businesses who invest in long term value rather than the quick buck – because that leads to higher growth for the economy, higher wages for workers, and yes, bigger profits, everybody will have a better time.
I will rewrite the tax code so it rewards hard work and investments here at home, not quick trades or stashing profits overseas.
I will give new incentives to companies that give their employees a fair share of the profits their hard work earns.
We will unleash a new generation of entrepreneurs and small business owners by providing tax relief, cutting red tape, and making it easier to get a small business loan.
We will restore America to the cutting edge of innovation, science, and research by increasing both public and private investments.
And we will make America the clean energy superpower of the 21st century.
Developing renewable power – wind, solar, advanced biofuels…
Building cleaner power plants, smarter electric grids, greener buildings…
Using additional fees and royalties from fossil fuel extraction to protect the environment…
And ease the transition for distressed communities to a more diverse and sustainable economic future from coal country to Indian country, from small towns in the Mississippi Delta to the Rio Grande Valley to our inner cities, we have to help our fellow Americans.
Now, this will create millions of jobs and countless new businesses, and enable America to lead the global fight against climate change.
We will also connect workers to their jobs and businesses. Customers will have a better chance to actually get where they need and get what they desire with roads, railways, bridges, airports, ports, and broadband brought up to global standards for the 21st century.
We will establish an infrastructure bank and sell bonds to pay for some of these improvements.
Now, building an economy for tomorrow also requires investing in our most important asset, our people, beginning with our youngest.
That’s why I will propose that we make preschool and quality childcare available to every child in America.
And I want you to remember this, because to me, this is absolutely the most-compelling argument why we should do this. Research tells us how much early learning in the first five years of life can impact lifelong success. In fact, 80 percent of the brain is developed by age three.
One thing I’ve learned is that talent is universal – you can find it anywhere – but opportunity is not. Too many of our kids never have the chance to learn and thrive as they should and as we need them to.
Our country won’t be competitive or fair if we don’t help more families give their kids the best possible start in life.
So let’s staff our primary and secondary schools with teachers who are second to none in the world, and receive the respect they deserve for sparking the love of learning in every child.
Let’s make college affordable and available to all …and lift the crushing burden of student debt.
Let’s provide lifelong learning for workers to gain or improve skills the economy requires, setting up many more Americans for success.
Now, the second fight is to strengthen America’s families, because when our families are strong, America is strong.
And today’s families face new and unique pressures. Parents need more support and flexibility to do their job at work and at home.
I believe you should have the right to earn paid sick days.
I believe you should receive your work schedule with enough notice to arrange childcare or take college courses to get ahead.
I believe you should look forward to retirement with confidence, not anxiety.
That you should have the peace of mind that your health care will be there when you need it, without breaking the bank.
I believe we should offer paid family leave so no one has to choose between keeping a paycheck and caring for a new baby or a sick relative.
And it is way past time to end the outrage of so many women still earning less than men on the job — and women of color often making even less.
This isn’t a women’s issue. It’s a family issue. Just like raising the minimum wage is a family issue. Expanding childcare is a family issue. Declining marriage rates is a family issue. The unequal rates of incarceration is a family issue. Helping more people with an addiction or a mental health problem get help is a family issue.
In America, every family should feel like they belong.
So we should offer hard-working, law-abiding immigrant families a path to citizenship. Not second-class status.
And, we should ban discrimination against LGBT Americans and their families so they can live, learn, marry, and work just like everybody else.
You know, America’s diversity, our openness, our devotion to human rights and freedom is what’s drawn so many to our shores. What’s inspired people all over the world. I know. I’ve seen it with my own eyes.
And these are also qualities that prepare us well for the demands of a world that is more interconnected than ever before.
So we have a third fight: to harness all of America’s power, smarts, and values to maintain our leadership for peace, security, and prosperity.
No other country on Earth is better positioned to thrive in the 21st century. No other country is better equipped to meet traditional threats from countries like Russia, North Korea, and Iran – and to deal with the rise of new powers like China.
No other country is better prepared to meet emerging threats from cyber attacks, transnational terror networks like ISIS, and diseases that spread across oceans and continents.
As your President, I’ll do whatever it takes to keep Americans safe.
And if you look over my left shoulder you can see the new World Trade Center soaring skyward.
As a Senator from New York, I dedicated myself to getting our city and state the help we needed to recover. And as a member of the Armed Services Committee, I worked to maintain the best-trained, best-equipped, strongest military, ready for today’s threats and tomorrow’s.
And when our brave men and women come home from war or finish their service, I’ll see to it that they get not just the thanks of a grateful nation, but the care and benefits they’ve earned.
I’ve stood up to adversaries like Putin and reinforced allies like Israel. I was in the Situation Room on the day we got bin Laden.
But, I know — I know we have to be smart as well as strong.
Meeting today’s global challenges requires every element of America’s power, including skillful diplomacy, economic influence, and building partnerships to improve lives around the world with people, not just their governments.
There are a lot of trouble spots in the world, but there’s a lot of good news out there too.
I believe the future holds far more opportunities than threats if we exercise creative and confident leadership that enables us to shape global events rather than be shaped by them.
And we all know that in order to be strong in the world, though, we first have to be strong at home. That’s why we have to win the fourth fight – reforming our government and revitalizing our democracy so that it works for everyday Americans.
We have to stop the endless flow of secret, unaccountable money that is distorting our elections, corrupting our political process, and drowning out the voices of our people.
We need Justices on the Supreme Court who will protect every citizen’s right to vote, rather than every corporation’s right to buy elections.
If necessary, I will support a constitutional amendment to undo the Supreme Court’s decision in Citizens United.
I want to make it easier for every citizen to vote. That’s why I’ve proposed universal, automatic registration and expanded early voting.
I’ll fight back against Republican efforts to disempower and disenfranchise young people, poor people, people with disabilities, and people of color.
What part of democracy are they afraid of?
No matter how easy we make it to vote, we still have to give Americans something worth voting for.
Government is never going to have all the answers – but it has to be smarter, simpler, more efficient, and a better partner.
That means access to advanced technology so government agencies can more effectively serve their customers, the American people.
We need expertise and innovation from the private sector to help cut waste and streamline services.
There’s so much that works in America. For every problem we face, someone somewhere in America is solving it. Silicon Valley cracked the code on sharing and scaling a while ago. Many states are pioneering new ways to deliver services. I want to help Washington catch up.
To do that, we need a political system that produces results by solving problems that hold us back, not one overwhelmed by extreme partisanship and inflexibility.
Now, I’ll always seek common ground with friend and opponent alike. But I’ll also stand my ground when I must.
That’s something I did as Senator and Secretary of State — whether it was working with Republicans to expand health care for children and for our National Guard, or improve our foster care and adoption system, or pass a treaty to reduce the number of Russian nuclear warheads that could threaten our cities — and it’s something I will always do as your President.
We Americans may differ, bicker, stumble, and fall; but we are at our best when we pick each other up, when we have each other’s back.
Like any family, our American family is strongest when we cherish what we have in common, and fight back against those who would drive us apart.
People all over the world have asked me: “How could you and President Obama work together after you fought so hard against each other in that long campaign?”
Now, that is an understandable question considering that in many places, if you lose an election you could get imprisoned or exiled – even killed – not hired as Secretary of State.
But President Obama asked me to serve, and I accepted because we both love our country. That’s how we do it in America.
With that same spirit, together, we can win these four fights.
We can build an economy where hard work is rewarded.
We can strengthen our families.
We can defend our country and increase our opportunities all over the world.
And we can renew the promise of our democracy.
If we all do our part. In our families, in our businesses, unions, houses of worship, schools, and, yes, in the voting booth.
I want you to join me in this effort. Help me build this campaign and make it your own.
Talk to your friends, your family, your neighbors.
Text “JOIN” J-O-I-N to 4-7-2-4-6.
Go to hillaryclinton.com and sign up to make calls and knock on doors.
It’s no secret that we’re going up against some pretty powerful forces that will do and spend whatever it takes to advance a very different vision for America. But I’ve spent my life fighting for children, families, and our country. And I’m not stopping now.
You know, I know how hard this job is. I’ve seen it up close and personal.
All our Presidents come into office looking so vigorous. And then we watch their hair grow grayer and grayer.
Well, I may not be the youngest candidate in this race. But I will be the youngest woman President in the history of the United States!
And the first grandmother as well.
And one additional advantage: You’re won’t see my hair turn white in the White House. I’ve been coloring it for years!
So I’m looking forward to a great debate among Democrats, Republicans, and Independents. I’m not running to be a President only for those Americans who already agree with me. I want to be a President for all Americans.
And along the way, I’ll just let you in on this little secret. I won’t get everything right. Lord knows I’ve made my share of mistakes. Well, there’s no shortage of people pointing them out!
And I certainly haven’t won every battle I’ve fought. But leadership means perseverance and hard choices. You have to push through the setbacks and disappointments and keep at it.
I think you know by now that I’ve been called many things by many people — “quitter” is not one of them.
Like so much else in my life, I got this from my mother.
When I was a girl, she never let me back down from any bully or barrier. In her later years, Mom lived with us, and she was still teaching me the same lessons. I’d come home from a hard day at the Senate or the State Department, sit down with her at the small table in our breakfast nook, and just let everything pour out. And she would remind me why we keep fighting, even when the odds are long and the opposition is fierce.
I can still hear her saying: “Life’s not about what happens to you, it’s about what you do with what happens to you – so get back out there.”
She lived to be 92 years old, and I often think about all the battles she witnessed over the course of the last century — all the progress that was won because Americans refused to give up or back down.
She was born on June 4, 1919 — before women in America had the right to vote. But on that very day, after years of struggle, Congress passed the Constitutional Amendment that would change that forever.
The story of America is a story of hard-fought, hard-won progress. And it continues today. New chapters are being written by men and women who believe that all of us – not just some, but all – should have the chance to live up to our God-given potential.
Not only because we’re a tolerant country, or a generous country, or a compassionate country, but because we’re a better, stronger, more prosperous country when we harness the talent, hard work, and ingenuity of every single American.
I wish my mother could have been with us longer. I wish she could have seen Chelsea become a mother herself. I wish she could have met Charlotte.
I wish she could have seen the America we’re going to build together.
An America, where if you do your part, you reap the rewards.
Where we don’t leave anyone out, or anyone behind.
An America where a father can tell his daughter: yes, you can be anything you want to be. Even President of the United States.
Thank you all. God bless you. And may God bless America.

Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker; all of the members of the House of Delegates, the officers and trustees of the AMA, and all whom you represent. It is an honor for me to be with you at this meeting and to have the opportunity to participate with you in an ongoing conversation about our health care system and the kinds of constructive changes that we all wish to see brought to it.
I know that you have, through Health Access America, and through other activities and programs of the AMA been deeply involved in this conversation already, and all of us are grateful for your contribution. I'm also pleased that you invited students from the Nathan Davis Elementary School to join us here this afternoon. I know that the AMA has a special relationship with this school, named as it is for the founder of the AMA, and that the AMA participates in its corporate capacity in the Adopt a School program here in Chicago. You have made a real contribution to these young men and women. And not only have you provided free immunizations and physicals and lectures and help about health and related matters, but you have served as role models and mentors. It is very important that all of us as adults do what we can to give young people the skills they will need to become responsible and successful adults. And I congratulate you for your efforts and welcome the students here today.
All of us respond to children. We want to nurture them so they can dream the dreams that free and healthy children should have. This is our primary responsibility as adults. And it is our primary responsibility as a government. We should stand behind families, teachers and others who work with the young, so that we can enable them to meet their own needs by becoming self-sufficient and responsible so that they, in turn, will be able to meet their families and their own children's needs.
When I was growing up, not far from where we are today, this seemed an easier task. There seemed to be more strong families. There seemed to be safer neighborhoods. There seemed to be an outlook of caring and cooperation among adults that stood for and behind children. I remember so well my father saying to me that if you get in trouble at school, you get in trouble at home -- no questions asked -- because there was this sense among the adult community that all of them, from my child's perspective, were involved in helping their own and others' children.
Much has changed since those days. We have lost some of the hope and optimism of that earlier time. Today, we too often meet our greatest challenges, whether it is the raising of children or reforming the health care system, with a sense that our problems have grown too large and unmanageable. And I don't need to tell you that kind of attitude begins to undermine one's sense of hope, optimism, and even competence.
We know now -- and you know better than I -- that over the last decade our health care system has been under extraordinary stress. It is one of the many institutions in our society that has experienced such stress. That stress has begun to break down many of the relationships that should stand at the core of the health care system. That breakdown has, in turn, undermined your profession in many ways, changing the nature of and the rewards of practicing medicine.
Most doctors and other health care professionals choose careers in health and medicine because they want to help people. But too often because our system isn't working and we haven't taken full responsibility for fixing it, that motive is butted by perceptions that doctors aren't the same as they used to be. They're not really doing what they used to do. They don't really care like they once did.
You know and I know that we have to work harder to renew a trust in who doctors are and what doctors do. That is also not unique to the medical community. Just as our institutions across society are under attack and stress, all elements of those institutions are finding that they no longer can command the trust and respect, whether we talk of parents or government officials or other professionals -- police officers, teachers -- that should come with giving of themselves and doing a job well that needs to be done.
But focusing this afternoon on those concerns that are yours -- what has happened with medicine, what is likely to happen -- we need to start with a fundamental commitment to making the practice of medicine again a visible, honored link in our efforts to promote the common good. And the way to do that is to improve the entire system of which you are a part. We cannot create the atmosphere of trust and respect and professionalism that you deserve to have, and that many of you who are in this room remember from earlier years, without changing the incentives and the way the entire system operates. That has to be our primary commitment. If we do not put medicine and those who operate within medicine in the forefront of the respect they deserve to have, no matter what we do to the system on the margins will not make the differences that it should.
As you know, the President is in the process of finalizing his proposal for health care reform, and I am grateful to speak with you about that process and where it is today and where it is going. I had originally hoped to join you at your meeting in March in Washington, D.C. And I, again, want to apologize for my absence. I very much appreciated Vice President Gore attending for me, and I also appreciated the kind words from your executive officials on behalf of the entire association because of my absence.
My father was ill and I spent several weeks with him in the hospital before he died. During his hospitalization at St. Vincent's Hospital in Little Rock, Arkansas, I witnessed firsthand the courage and commitment of health care professionals, both directly and indirectly. I will always appreciate the sensitivity and the skills they showed, not just in caring for my father, not just in caring for his family -- which, as you know, often needs as much care as the patient, but in caring for the many others whose names I will never know. I know that some of you worry about what the impact of health care reform will be on your profession and on your practice. Let me say from the start, if I read only what the newspapers have said about what we are doing in our plan, I'd probably be a little afraid myself, too, because it is very difficult to get out what is going on in such a complex process.
But the simple fact is this: The President has asked all of us, representatives of the AMA, of every other element of the health care system, as well as the administration, to work on making changes where they are needed, to keeping and improving those things that work, and to preserving and conserving the best parts of our system as we try to improve and change those that are not.
This system is not working as well as it did, or as well as it could -- for you, for the private sector, for the public or for the nation. The one area that is so important to be understood on a macronational level is how our failure to deal with the health care system and its financial demands is at the center of our problems financially in Washington. Because we cannot control health care costs and become further and further behind in our efforts to do so, we find our economy, and particularly the federal budget, under increasing pressure.
Just as it would be irresponsible, therefore, to change what is working in the health care system, it is equally irresponsible for us not to fix what we know is no longer working. So let us start with some basic principles that are remarkably like the ones that you have adopted in your statements, and in particularly in Health Access America. We must guarantee all Americans access to a comprehensive package of benefits, no matter where they work, where they live, or whether they have ever been sick before. If we do not reach universal access, we cannot deal with our other problems.
And that is a point that you understand that you have to help the rest of the country understand -- that until we do provide security for every American when it comes to health care, we cannot fix what is wrong with the health care system. Secondly, we do have to control costs. How we do that is one of the great challenges in this system, but one thing we can all agree on is that we have to cut down on the paperwork and reduce the bureaucracy in both the public and private sectors.
We also have to be sure that when we look at costs, we look at it not just from a financial perspective, but also from a human perspective. I remember sitting in the family waiting area of St. Vincent's, talking to a number of my physician friends to stop by to see how we were doing. And one day, one of my friends told me that, every day, he discharges patients who need medication to stabilize a condition. And at least once a day, he knows there is a patient who will not be able to afford the prescription drugs he has prescribed, with the result that that patient may decide not to fill the prescription when the hospital supply runs out. Or that patient may decide that even though the doctor told him to take three pills a day, he'll just take one a day so it can be stretched further.
And even though St. Vincent's has created a fund to try to help support the needs of patients who cannot afford prescriptions, there's not enough to go around, and so every day there is someone who my friend knows and you know will be back in the hospital because of their inability either to afford the care that is required after they leave, or because they try to cut the corners on it, with the net result that then you and I will pay more for that person who is back in the hospital than we would have if we had taken a sensible approach toward what the real costs in the medical system are. That is why we will try, for example, to include prescription drugs in the comprehensive benefit package for all Americans, including those over 65, through Medicare.
We believe that if we help control costs up front, we will save costs on the back end. That is a principle that runs through our proposal and which each of you knows from firsthand experience is more likely to be efficient in both human and financial terms. We will also preserve what is best in the American health care system today.
We have looked at every other system in the world. We have tried to talk to every expert whom we can find to describe how any other country tries to provide health care. And we have concluded that what is needed is an American solution for an American problem by creating an American health care system that works for America. And two of the principles that underlie that American solution are quality and choice.
We want to ensure and enhance quality. And in order to do that, we're going to have to make some changes, and you know that. We cannot, for example, promise to really achieve universal access if we do not expand our supply of primary care physicians, and we must do that. And you will have to help us determine the best way to go about achieving that goal.
I've spoken with representatives of our medical schools, and we have talked about how the funding of graduate medical education will have to be changed to provide incentives for the training of more primary care physicians. I have talked with representatives of many of the associations, such as this one, about how continuing educational opportunities could help even mid- career physicians, once we have a real supply of primary care physicians who are adequately reimbursed and adequately supported, how they might even go back into primary care.
We have also very much put choice in the center of our system so that we will have not just choice for patients as to which plan they choose to join, but choice for physicians as to which plan they choose to practice with, including the option of being part of more than one plan at the same time.
Now, as we work out all of the details in the many proposals and its parts that must come together, I am not suggesting that you will agree with every recommendation the President makes. I don't expect any group to do that. In fact, I suppose that if everybody's not a little put out that means we probably haven't done it right. But I do hope and expect that this group, as with other groups representing physicians and nurses and other health care professionals will find in this plan much to be applauded and supported. And I also believe that given the complexities of the problem we face, it would be difficult to arrive at a solution that was universally accepted.
But the reason I have confidence that this house, the AMA, and others will be supportive of the President's proposal is because we have benefited so much from what you have already done and from the involvement of many of you and others around the country.
Again, contrary to what you may have heard scores of practicing physicians served on the working groups that were studying health care reform. I am deeply grateful on a personal level that members of the AMA's leadership spent invaluable time coming to meeting after meeting, day after day sharing their ideas, reacting to ideas at the White House. And, of course, in the course of that we learned we had many common goals and objectives.
We will not only stand for universal coverage, but in addition the following: community rating so that we can assure all Americans they will be taken care of -- (applause); eliminating restrictions based on preexisting conditions so that every American will be eligible -- (applause); a nationally guaranteed comprehensive benefits package that will emphasize primary and preventive health care as well as hospitalization and other care -- (applause); the kind of choice and quality assurances that we will need to have to make sure this new system not only operates well during the transition but gets a firm footing as it moves into the future and we will therefore be emphasizing more on practice parameters and outcomes research so that you, too, can know better what works.
One of the great interesting experiences I have had during the past months is as I've traveled around from state to state is having doctors coming up to me and telling me that they need more information; that all too often the information they receive doesn't come to them in forms that they believe are practical in their particular context. And what we want to do is by working with organizations like yours is be sure that the quality outcomes and the kind of research that will done will be readily available to every practicing physician in the country.
We also believe that it will be essential to continue medical research and to use the breakthroughs in medical research, again, not just to alleviate human suffering but to save money, because you know better than I that often times a breakthrough in research, a new drug, a new procedure is the quickest way to take care of the most people in a cost-effective manner. So we will continue to support medical research.
All of these principles arise from the same common assumption -- that the status quo is unacceptable. And it is not really even any longer a status quo because we do not stand still, we drift backwards. Every month people lose their insurance; every month you have more micromanagement and regulation to put up with; every month our health care system becomes more expensive to fix.
I know that many of you feel that as doctors you are under siege in the current system. And I think there is cause for you to believe that, because we are witnessing a disturbing assault on the doctor/patient relationship. More and more employers are buying into managed care plans that force employees to choose from a specific pool of doctors. And too often, even when a doctor is willing to join a new plan to maintain his relationship with patients, he, or she I should say, is frozen out.
What we want to see is a system in which the employer does not make the choice as to what plan is available for the employee, the employee makes that choice for him or herself. But if we do not change and if the present pattern continues, as it will if we do not act quickly, the art of practicing medicine will be forever transformed. Gone will be the patients treasured privilege to choose his or her doctor. Gone will be the close trusting bonds built up between physicians and patients over the years. Gone will be the security of knowing you can switch jobs and still visit your longtime internist or pediatrician or OB/GYN.
We cannot afford to let that happen. But the erosion of the doctor/patient relationship is only one piece of the problem. Another piece is the role that insurance companies have come to play and the role that the government has come to play along with them in second-guessing medical decisions.
I can understand how many of you must feel. When instead of being trusted for your expertise, you're expected to call an 800 number and get approval for even basic medical procedures from a total stranger.
Frankly, despite my best efforts of the last month to understand every aspect of the health care system, it is and remains a mystery to me how a person sitting at a computer in some air- conditioned office thousands of miles away can make a judgment about what should or shouldn't happen at a patient's bedside in Illinois or Georgia or California. The result of this excessive oversight, this peering over all of your shoulder's is a system of backward incentives. It rewards providers for over prescribing, overtesting, and generally overdoing. And worse, it punishes doctors who show proper restraint and exercise their professional judgment in ways that those sitting at the computers disagree with.
Dr. Bob Barrinson, one of the practicing physicians who spent hours and hours working with us while also maintaining his practice, told us recently of an experience that he had as one of many. He admitted an emergency room patient named Jeff. Jeff suffered from cirrhosis of the liver and --. Dr. Barrinson put him in the hospital and within 24 hours received a call from Jeff's insurance company. The insurance company wanted to know exactly how many days Jeff would be in the hospital and why. Dr. Barrinson replied that he couldn't predict the precise length of stay. A few days later the insurance company called back and questioned whether Jeff would need surgery. Again, Dr. Barrinson said he wasn't yet sure.
And what was Dr. Barrinson's reward for his honesty and his professionalism? He was placed on the insurance company's "special exceptions" list. You know, that's a list of troublesome doctors who make the insurance company wait a few days or a few weeks to determine the bottom line on a particular patient.
From that point on, the insurance company called Dr. Barrinson six times in two weeks. Each time he had to be summoned away from the patient to take the call. Each time he spoke to a different insurance company representative. Each time he repeated the same story. Each time his role as the physician was subverted. And each time the treatment of the patient was impeded.
Dr. Barrinson and you know that medicine, the art of healing, doesn't work like that. There is no master checklist that can be administered by some faceless bureaucrat that can tell you what you need to do on an hourly basis to take care of your patients; and, frankly, I wouldn't want to be one of your patients if there were.
Now, adding to these difficulties doctors and hospitals and nurses, particularly, are being buried under an avalanche of paperwork. There are mountains of forms, mountains of rules, mountains of hours spent on administrative minutiae instead of caring for the sick. Where, you might ask yourself, did all this bureaucracy come from? And the short answer is, basically, everywhere.
There are forms to ensure appropriate care for the sick and the dying; forms to guard against unnecessary tests and procedures. And from each insurance company and government agency there are forms to record the decisions of doctors and nurses. I remember going to Boston and having a physician bring into a hearing I held there the stack of forms his office is required to fill out. And he held up a Medicare form and next to it he held up an insurance company form. And he said that they are the same forms that ask the same questions, but the insurance company form will not be accepted by the government, and the government form will not be accepted by the insurance company. And the insurance company basically took the government form, changed the title to call it by its own name and requires them to have it filled out. That was the tip of the iceberg.
One nurse told me that she entered the profession because she wanted to care for people. She said that if she had wanted to be an accountant, she would have gone to work for an accounting company instead. (Laughter.) But she, like many other nurses, and as you know so well, many of the people in your offices now, are required to be bookkeepers and accountants, not clinicians, not caregivers.
The latest statistic I have seen is that for every doctor a hospital hires, four new administrative staff are hired. And that in the average doctor's office 80 hours a month is now spent on administration. That is not time spent with a patient recovering from bypass surgery or with a child or teenager who needs a checkup and maybe a little extra TLC time of listening and counseling, and certainly not spent with a patient who has to run in quickly for some kind of an emergency.
Blanketing an entire profession with rules aimed at catching those who are not living up to their professional standards does not improve quality. What we need is a new bargain. We need to remove from the vast majority of physicians these unnecessary, repetitive, often uneven read forms and instead substitute for what they were attempting to do -- more discipline, more peer review, more careful scrutiny of your colleagues. You are the ones who can tell better than I or better than some bureaucrat whether the quality of medicine that is being practiced in your clinic, in your hospital, is what you would want for yourself and your family.
Let us remove the kind of micromanagement and regulation that has not improved quality and has wasted billions of dollars, but then you have to help us substitute for it, a system that the patients of this country, the public of this country, the decision- makers of this country can have confidence in. Now, I know there are legal obstacles for your being able to do that, and we are looking very closely at how we can remove those so that you can be part -- (applause) -- of creating a new solution in which everyone, including yourself, can believe in.
In every private conversation I've had with a physician, whether it's someone I knew from St. Vincent's or someone I had just met, I have asked: Tell me, have you ever practiced with or around someone you did not think was living up to your standards? And, invariably, the answer is, well, yes, I remember in my training; well, yes, I remember this emergency room work I used to do; yes, I remember in the hospital when so-and-so had that problem. And I've said, do you believe enough was done by the profession to deal with that problem and to eliminate it? And, invariably, no matter who the doctor is, I've been told, no, I don't.
We want you to have the chance so that in the future you can say, yes, I do believe we've been dealing with our problems. It is not something we should leave for the government, and, certainly, we cannot leave it to the patient. That is the new kind of relationship I think that we need to have.
Finally, if we do not, as I said earlier, provide universal coverage, we cannot do any of what I have just been speaking about because we cannot fulfill our basic commitment you as physicians, us as a society, that we will care for one another. It should no longer be left to the individual doctor to decide to probe his conscience before determining whether to treat a needy patient. I cannot tell you what it is like for me to travel around to hear stories from doctors and patients that are right on point.
But the most poignant that I tell because it struck me so personally was of the woman with no insurance; working for a company in New Orleans; had worked there for a number of years; tried to take good care of herself; went for the annual physical every year; and I sat with her on a folding chair in the loading dock of her company along with others -- all of whom were uninsured; all of whom had worked numbers of years -- while she told me at her last physical her doctor had found a lump in her breast and referred her to a surgeon. And the surgeon told her that if she had insurance, he would have biopsied it but because she did not he would watch it.
I don't think you have to be a woman to feel what I felt when that woman told me that story. And I don't think you have to be a physician to feel what you felt when you heard that story. We need to create a system in which no one ever has to say that for good cause or bad, and no one has to hear it ever again.
If we move toward universal coverage, so therefore everyone has a payment stream behind them to be able to come into your office, to be able to come into the hospital, you will again be able to make decisions that should be made with clinical autonomy, with professional judgment. And we intend to try to give you the time and free you up from other conditions to be able to do that.
One specific issue I want to mention, because I feel strongly about it -- if my husband had not asked me to do this, I would have felt strongly about it because of the impact in my state of Arkansas -- we have to simplify and eliminate the burdensome regulations created under *CLEA -- (applause) -- a well-intentioned law with many unintended consequences that have affected not only those of you in private practice but public health departments like ours in Arkansas around the country.
But again we need that new bargain. You have to help us know what should be eliminated so that we then can just focus in on a very small part of this whole situation and eliminate the rest of the regulations that were thrown on top.
So those are the kinds of issues in which we think we can make it more possible for you to practice in a more efficient, humane, better manner. We also believe strongly that we have to emphasize preventive care. And we have to provide a basic policy of preventive care. And we have to be sure that all of you and those who come after you into medicine are trained well in medical school to appreciate the importance of preventive care.
Much of what is now considered outside the scope of mainstream medicine is crowding in. Many of us in this room I know exercise, try to watch our diets, do things to try to remain healthier. And yet often medical education and medicine as it's practiced does not include those new kind of common-sense approaches to health. We need to be a system that does not take care of the sick but instead promotes health wherever we can in whatever way we possibly can do it.
And finally, let me say that we will offer a serious proposal to curb malpractice problems for all of you. But let me add that it, too, must be part of this new contract. In order to do that and to do it in a way that engenders the confidence of the average American, we must have organized medicine standing ready to say we will do a better job of taking care of the problems within us.
I have read or tried to read everything I can find about all of this. And you know as well as I do there are studies all over the field. It depends upon who writes it and who it's written for and the like. But we know there's a problem. We know we're going to deal with it. But one of the stark statistics from these studies is that all too often the largest number of malpractice suits is brought against the same physicians on a repetitive basis.
Now, it may be that for some that is an unfair accusation, and we need to deal with that through reform. But for others, you need to weed them out of your profession if they cannot practice to the quality that you expect your fellow colleagues to practice to. So we will propose serious malpractice reform, and we will have to look to you to help us make sure that the problems that will still flow from people who should not be making decisions will be eliminated. That way we can give confidence back to you as a profession, that you will not be second-guessed or unfairly called into court. And we will give confidence to the public that they will be protected insofar as humanly possible. So that is what we will have to look for when we come forward with that.
Now, reaching consensus on all that should be done and putting it into a piece of legislation and moving it through the Congress is not going to be easy. There will be many groups that will nibble at the edges of it, not like the whole idea of it, want to continue to the status quo. But if we do not have the courage to change now, if we do not move toward a system that once again gives you back your professionalism to practice prudent, practical, intelligent medicine again; if we do not move toward restoring the dignity again to the doctor-patient relationship, and that encourages young people to become physicians because they want to participate in that wonderful process of healing and caring, then the entire society, but most particularly medicine, will suffer.
The reason we are doing any of this is because of children like those who are here from Nathan Davis. Most of us in this room are at least halfway through. (Laughter.) And most of us in this room have sat in dozens and dozens of meetings just like this. We've sat and listened to people tell us what was wrong with health care or what medicine or with whatever, and we've talked about the problems at least seriously since the 1970s. And we've produced proposals like yours for Health Access America.
But while we have talked, our problems have gotten worse, and the frustration on the part of all of you and others has increased. Time and again, groups, individuals, and particularly the government, has walked up to trying to reform health care and then walked away.
There's enough blame to go around, every kind of political stripes can be included, but the point now is that we could have done something about health care reform 20 years ago and solved our problems for millions of dollars, and we walked away. Later we could have done something and solved our problems for hundreds of millions, and we walked away.
After 20 years with rate of medical inflation going up and with all of the problems you know so well, it is a harder and more difficult solution that confronts us. But I believe that if one looks at what is at stake, we are not talking just about reforming the way we finance health care, we are not talking just about the particulars of how we deliver health care, we are talking about creating a new sense of community and caring in this country in which we once again value your contribution, value the dignity of all people.
How many more meetings do we need? How many alerts? How many more plans? How many more brochures? The time has come for all of us, not just with respect to health care, but with respect to all of the difficulties our country faces to stop walking away and to start stepping up and taking responsibility. We are supposed to be the ones to lead for our children and our grandchildren. And the way we have behaved in the last years, we have run away and abdicated that responsibility. And at the core of the human experience is responsibility for children to leave them a better world than the one we found.
We can do that with health care. We can make a difference now that will be a legacy for all of you. We can once again give you the confidence to say to your grandsons and granddaughters, yes, do go into medicine; yes, it is the most rewarding profession there is.
So let's celebrate your profession by improving health care. Let's celebrate our children by reforming this system. Let's come together not as liberals or conservatives or Republicans or Democrats, but as Americans who want the best for their country and know we can no longer wait to get about the business of providing it.
Thank you all very much.

I would like to thank the Secretary General of the United Nations for inviting me to be part of the United Nations Fourth World Conference on Women. This is truly a celebration -- a celebration on the contributions women make in every aspect of life: in the home, on the job, in their communities, as mothers, wives, sisters, daughters, learners, workers, citizens and leaders. It is also a coming together, much the way women come together every day in every country.
We come together in fields and in factories. In village markets and supermarkets. In living rooms and board rooms.
Whether it is while playing with our children in the park, or washing clothes in a river, or taking a break at the office water cooler, we come together and talk about our aspirations and concerns. And time and again, our talk turns to our children and our families. However different we may be, there is far more that unites us than divides us. We share a common future. And we are here to find common ground so that we may help bring new dignity and respect to women and girls all over the world - - and in so doing, bring new strength and stability to families as well. 
By gathering in Beijing, we are focusing world attention on issues that matter most in the lives of women and their families: access to education, health care, jobs, and credit, the chance to enjoy basic legal and human rights and participate fully in the political life of their countries.
There are some who question the reason for this conference. Let them listen to the voices of women in their homes, neighborhoods, and workplaces.
There are some who wonder whether the lives of women and girls matter to economic and political progress around the globe. . . Let them look at the women gathered here and at Huairou. . . the homemakers, nurses, teachers, lawyers, policymakers, and women who run their own businesses.
It is conferences like this that compel governments and peoples everywhere to listen, look and face the world's most pressing problems.Wasn't it after the women's conference in Nairobi ten years ago that the world focused for the first time on the crisis of domestic violence?
Earlier today, I participated in a World Health Organization forum, where government officials, NGOs, and individual citizens are working on ways to address the health problems of women and girls.
Tomorrow, I will attend a gathering of the United Nations Development Fund for Women. There, the discussion will focus on local - - and highly successful -- programs that give hard-working women access to credit so they can improve their lives and the lives of their families. What we are learning around the world is that, if women are healthy and educated, their families will flourish. If women are free from violence, their families will flourish. If women have a chance to work and earn as full and equal partners in society, their families will flourish. 
And when families flourish, communities and nations will flourish.
That is why every woman, every man, every child, every family, and every nation on our planet has a stake in the discussion that takes place here. Over the past 25 years, I have worked persistently on issues relating to women, children and families. Over the past two-and-a-half years, I have had the opportunity to learn more about the challenges facing women in my country and around the world.
I have met new mothers in Jojakarta, Indonesia, who come together regularly in their village to discuss nutrition, family planning, and baby care. 
I have met working parents in Denmark who talk about the comfort they feel in knowing that their children can be cared for in creative, safe, and nurturing after-school centers. 
I have met women in South Africa who helped lead the struggle to end apartheid and are now helping build a new democracy. 
I have met with the leading women of the Western Hemisphere who are working every day to promote literacy and better health care for the children of their countries. 
I have met women in India and Bangladesh who are taking out small loans to buy milk cows, rickshaws, thread and other materials to create a livelihood for themselves and their families. 
I have met doctors and nurses in Belarus and Ukraine who are trying to keep children alive in the aftermath of Chernobyl.
The great challenge of this conference is to give voice to women everywhere whose experiences go unnoticed, whose words go unheard. Women comprise more than half the world's population. Women are 70% percent of the world's poor, and two-thirds of those who are not taught to read and write. Women are the primary caretakers for most of the world's children and elderly. Yet much of the work we do is not valued - - not by economists, not by historians, not by popular culture, not by government leaders.
At this very moment, as we sit here, women around the world are giving birth, raising children, cooking meals, washing clothes, cleaning houses, planting crops, working on assembly lines, running companies, and running countries.Women are also dying from diseases that should have been prevented or treated; they are watching their children succumb to malnutrition caused by poverty and economic deprivation; they are being denied the right to go to school by their own fathers and brothers; they are being forced into prostitution, and they are being barred from the ballot box and the bank lending office.
Those of us with the opportunity to be here have the responsibility to speak for those who could not. As an American, I want to speak up for women in my own country -- women who are raising children on the minimum wage, women who can't afford health care or child care, women whose lives are threatened by violence, including violence in their own homes.
I want to speak up for mothers who are fighting for good schools, safe neighborhoods, clean air and clean airwaves . . . for older women, some of them widows, who have raised their families and now find that their skills and life experiences are not valued in the workplace . . . for women who are working all night as nurses, hotel clerks, and fast food chefs so that they can be at home during the day with their kids . . . and for women everywhere who simply don't have enough time to do everything they are called upon to do each day.
Speaking to you today, I speak for them, just as each of us speaks for women around the world who are denied the chance to go to school, or see a doctor, or own property, or have a say about the direction of their lives, simply because they are women. The truth is that most women around the world work both inside and outside the home, usually by necessity. We need to understand that there is no formula for how women should lead their lives. That is why we must respect the choices that each woman makes for herself and her family. Every woman deserves the chance to realize her God-given potential.
We must also recognize that women will never gain full dignity until their human rights are respected and protected. Our goals for this conference, to strengthen families and societies by empowering women to take greater control over their own destinies, cannot be fully achieved unless all governments - here and around the world - accept their responsibility to protect and promote internationally recognized human rights. The international community has long acknowledged - - and recently affirmed at Vienna - - that both women and men are entitled to a range of protections and personal freedoms, from the right of personal security to the right to determine freely the number and spacing of the children they bear.
No one should be forced to remain silent for fear of religious or political persecution, arrest, abuse or torture. Tragically, women are most often the ones whose human rights are violated. Even in the late 20th century, the rape of women continues to be used as an instrument of armed conflict. Women and children make up a large majority of the world's refugees. And when women are excluded from the political process, they become even more vulnerable to abuse. I believe that, on the eve of a new millennium, it is time to break our silence. It is time for us to say here in Beijing, and the world to hear, that is no longer acceptable to discuss women's rights as separate from human rights.
These abuses have continued because, for too long, the history of women has been a history of silence. Even today, there are those who are trying to silence our words. 
The voices of this conference and of the women at Huairou must be heard loud and clear.
It is a violation of human rights when babies are denied food, or drowned, or suffocated, or their spines broken, simply because they are girls. 
It is a violation of human rights when women and girls are sold into the slavery of prostitution. 
It is a violation of human rights when women are doused with gasoline, set on fire and burned to death because their marriage dowries are deemed too small. 
It is a violation of human rights when individual women are raped in their own communities and when thousands of women are subjected to rape as a tactic or prize of war. 
It is a violation of human rights when a leading cause of death worldwide among women ages 14 to 44 is the violence they are subjected to in their own homes. 
It is a violation of human rights when young girls are brutalized by the painful and degrading practice of genital mutilation. 
It is a violation of human rights when women are denied the right to plan their own families, and that includes being forced to have abortions or being sterilized against their will.
If there is one message that echoes forth from this conference, it is that human rights are women's rights . . . And women's rights are human rights. Let us not forget that among those rights are the right to speak freely. And the right to be heard. Women must enjoy the right to participate fully in the social and political lives of their countries if we want freedom and democracy to thrive and endure. It is indefensible that many women in non-governmental organizations who wished to participate in this conference have not been able to attend - - or have been prohibited from fully taking part. Let me be clear. Freedom means the right of people to assemble, organize, and debate openly. It means respecting the views of those who may disagree with the views of their governments. It means not taking citizens away from their loved ones and jailing them, mistreating them, or denying them their freedom or dignity because of the peaceful expression of their ideas and opinions.
In my country, we recently celebrated the 75th anniversary of women's suffrage. It took 150 years after the signing of our Declaration of Independence for women to win the right to vote. It took 72 years of organized struggle on the part of many courageous women and men. It was one of America's most divisive philosophical wars. But it was also a bloodless war. Suffrage was achieved without a shot fired. We have also have been reminded, in V-J Day observances last weekend, of the good that comes when men and women join together to combat the forces of tyranny and build a better world. We have seen peace prevail in most places for a half century. We have avoided another world war. 
But we have not solved older, deeply rooted problems that continue to diminish the potential of half the world's population. 
Now it is time to act on behalf of women everywhere.
If we take bold steps to better the lives of women, we will be taking bold steps to better the lives of children and families too. Families rely on mothers and wives for emotional support and care; families rely on women for labor in the home; and increasingly, families rely on women for income needed to raise healthy children and care for other relatives.As long as discrimination and inequities remain so commonplace around the world - - as long as girls and women are valued less, fed less, fed last, overworked, underpaid, not schooled and subjected to violence in and out of their homes - - the potential of the human family to create a peaceful, prosperous world will not be realized.
Let this conference be our - - and the world's - - call to action.And let us heed the call so that we can create a world in which every woman is treated with respect and dignity, every boy and girl is loved and cared for equally, and every family has the hope of a strong and stable future.
Thank you very much.
God's blessings on you, your work and all who benefit from it.

Thank you Lloyd. I love your beard. And hi everybody. You know it really is just such a pleasure to come here to Goldman Sachs. It’s one of those rare opportunities to kick back and let my hair down and just be among...
Lloyd did you sign this? It looks like Blankfoon. No..well..yeah. Yes Lloyd it is a lot of money that’s why I don’t want to have a problem cashing it. Well cut another one I’m gonna be talking for at least five minutes.
resumes
Anyway, It’s great to be here. Especially since I have absolutely no idea what I’m going to do with the rest of my life. In fact, Bill and I are thinking of buying a small parcel of land and opening a waffle bistro serving our own organically grown preserves and compote. I’ll let you know what I decide cause it really is so up in the air.
And I’m really touched that you wanted me to speak to you about the world.
As you may or may not know the world is a term that’s given to our planet of earth. There are several different chunks of the land parts of the world and these are called continents. There’s also these things called hemispheres but I don’t think we need to get that far into the weeds on this thing. The main point about the world is that, as my dear friend Hank Kissinger always says, we need to own it.
In closing let me say that I wish average people could see the Goldman Sachs that I know. Not the Goldman Sachs that hoards tin and moves it around from warehouse to warehouse to artificially inflate the price of a soda can. But the Goldman Sachs who knows how bad soda is for poor people and is only trying to help.
So keep up the great work and if by some miracle I do decide to re-enter politics I think you know me well enough to know that...

Thank you all so much. What a Super Tuesday.
You know all across our country today they, Democrats, voted to break down barriers so we can all rise together.
I am so delighted to be here with you in Florida.
I congratulate Senator Sanders on his strong showing and campaigning and I’m grateful to all of you who voted for me, to the volunteers and organizers. I know you’ve worked your hearts out. And to all my friends, many of a lifetime who traveled to all the states to tell people about the candidate they knew. And to the hundreds of thousands of people who went to Hillary Clinton dot com to give what they could, most less than $100.
Now this campaign moves forward to the Crescent City, the Motor City and beyond. We’re going to work for every vote and we will need all of you to keep volunteering, contributing, doing everything you can – talking to your friends and neighbors. Because this country belongs to all of us, not just those at the top.
Not just the people who look one way, worship one way, or even think one way. America prospers when we all prosper. America is strong when we’re all strong.
And we know we’ve got work to do. But, that work, that work is not to make America great again. America never stopped being great. We need …
We have to make America whole. We have to fill in what’s been hollowed out.
We have to make strong the broken places, re-stitch the bonds of trust and respect across our country.
Now it might be unusual, as I’ve said before, for a presidential candidate to say this, but I’m going to keep saying it, “I believe what we need in America today is more love and kindness.”
Because you know what? It works. Instead of building walls we’re going to break down barriers and build … 
… build ladders of opportunity and empowerment so every American can live up to his or her potential, because then and only then can America live up to its full potential too.
Now it’s clear tonight that the stakes in this election have never been higher. And the rhetoric we’re hearing on the other side has never been lower.
Trying to divide America between us and them is wrong, and we’re not going to let it work.
You know whether we like it or not, we’re all in this together, my friends, and we all have to do our part. But unfortunately, too many of those with the most wealth and the most power in this country today seem to have forgotten that basic truth about America. You know yesterday I was at the Old South Meeting House in Boston where nearly two and a half centuries ago American patriots organized the original Tea Party.
And I had to wonder what they would make of corporations that seem to have absolutely no loyalty to the country that they love so much. What would they say about student loan companies that overcharge young people struggling to get out of debt. Even young men and women serving our country in the military, or corporations that shift their headquarters overseas to avoid paying their fair share of taxes like Johnson Controls, an auto parts company from Wisconsin that all of us, we taxpayers, helped to bail out with the auto rescue back in 2008. Now they’re turning their back on America.
Now I’m not interested in condemning whole categories of people or businesses. I’m just interested in making things right. So let there be no doubt, if you cheat your employees, exploit consumers, pollute our environment or rip off the taxpayers, we’re going to hold you accountable.
But, if you do the right thing, if you invest in your workers, and in America’s future then we’ll stand with you. We all need to work together to break down the barriers holding back our families and our country. Because the middle class needs a raise.
And more good jobs. Jobs that pay enough for a family to live on. Even put a little away for retirement. Jobs that provide dignity and a bright future. That’s why we have to invest in manufacturing and infrastructure and small business and clean energy – enough clean energy to power every home in America.
Don’t let anybody tell you we can’t make things in America anymore, because we can, we are, and we will. And together we can break down the barriers that face working class families across America, especially in struggling rust belt communities and small, Appalachian town that have been hollowed out by lost jobs and lost hope. Families who for generations kept our lights on and our factories running. Together we can break down barriers for our kids so they get the education they need and deserve.
Every child in America should have a great school and a great teacher no matter what zip code they live in. Together we can break down barriers for women and finally guarantee equal pay for equal work.
And we can break down barriers for families who’ve seen too many black children harassed, humiliated, and even killed. WE can break down barriers for voters in North Carolina who’ve been systematically disenfranchised and dis(inaudible).
We can break down barriers for hard-working immigrants everywhere who are too often exploited and intimidated. We have to defend all our rights – workers’ rights, and women’s rights, civil rights and voting rights, LGBT rights and rights for people with disabilities. And that starts by standing with President Obama when he nominates a strong, progressive justice.
I know too many Americans have lost faith in our future. We hear it in the voices of parents who don’t know how they’re going to give their kids the opportunities they deserve. We see it in the eyes of working men and women who don’t expect to come easy but wonder why it has to be quite so hard.
Like many of you I find strength and purpose in the values I learned from my family and my faith. They gave me simple words to live by, an old Methodist saying. Do all the good you can, for all the people you can, for as long as you can, and that is why
… that is why I believe deeply that if we resist the forces trying to drive us apart we can come together to make this country work for everyone. The struggling, the striving, and the successful, if we all do our part we can restore our common faith in our common future. That’s the spirit powering this campaign. It comes from a young janitor in Arkansas who stopped buying junk food and putting off getting a haircut so he could contribute to it. It comes from the disabled combat veteran from Nebraska who sent in $10. In 70 years of his life he had never donated to a political campaign until now.
You can join us too. Please go to Hillary Clinton dot com, make a donation, text “join” to 47246, and let me leave you with a story that has inspired so many of us. By now we all know what happened in Flint, Michigan, don’t we. Our city’s children were poisoned by toxic water because their governor wanted to save a little money. But there’s another story in Flint.
It’s the story of a community that’s been knocked down but refused to be knocked out. It is hundreds of union plumbers coming from across the country to install new water fixtures. It’s students raising funds for water deliveries and showing up to distribute supplies. It’s the United Auto Workers and General Motors donating millions of dollars to help.
And when I visited Flint a few weeks ago I went to the House of Prayer Missionary Baptist Church. The congregation locked arms and sang, “We’ve come too far from we started from.” They’re not about to quit now. We know there are many other Flints out there. Communities that are hurting and need help. But we’ve come too far in this country to let us turn back.
We’re gonna build on the progress that we’ve made. We saved the auto industry thanks to President Obama, now we gotta create new jobs and industries of the future.
We now have insured 90 percent of Americans thanks to President Obama and now we’ve got to finish the job and get to 100 percent. We have come too far to stop now. We’ve got to keep going. Keep working. Keep breaking down those barriers and imagine what we can build together when each and every American has a chance to live up to his or her own God-given potential.
Thank you all so very much. Thank you.

Thank you. Thank you so much. I mean, wow, this is amazing. Thank you all. Thank you.
You know, we started this great effort on a sunny July morning in Pinder’s Corner on Pat and Liz Moynihan’s beautiful farm. And 62 counties, 16 months, three debates, two opponents and six black pantsuits later, because of you, here we are.
You came out and said that issues and ideals matter; jobs matter, down state and upstate; health care matters; education matters; the environment matters; Social Security matters; a woman’s right to choose matters.
It all matters. And I just want to say from the bottom of my heart: Thank you, New York.
Thank you for opening up your minds and your hearts, for seeing the possibility of what we could do together for our children and for our future here in this state and in our nation. I am profoundly grateful to all of you for giving me the chance to serve you.
I will do everything I can to be worthy of your faith and trust, and to honor the powerful example of Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan.
I would like all of you and the countless New Yorkers and Americans watching to join me in honoring him for his incredible half- century of service to New York and our nation.
Senator Moynihan, on behalf of New York and America, thank you.
And I thank Chuck Schumer for his generous support and friendship.
He has been and will be a great champion for the people of New York. And I very much look forward to fighting by his side in the United States Senate.
I want to thank both of my opponents, Mayor Giuliani and Congressman Lazio.
Congressman Lazio and I just spoke. I congratulate him on a hard-fought race, and I thank him for his service to the people of New York and Long Island. And I wish him, Pat and their two beautiful daughters well.
I promise you tonight that I will reach across party lines to bring progress for all of New York’s families. Today we voted as Democrats and Republicans; tomorrow we begin again as New Yorkers.
And how fortunate we are, indeed, to live in the most diverse, dynamic and beautiful state in the entire union.
You know, from the South Bronx to the southern tier, from Brooklyn to Buffalo, from Montauk to Massena, from the world’s tallest skyscrapers to breathtaking mountain ranges, I’ve met people whose faces and stories I will never forget.
Thousands of New Yorkers from all 62 counties welcomed me into your schools, your local diners, your factory floors, your living rooms and front porches. You taught me. You tested me. And you shared with me your challenges and concerns about overcrowded or crumbling schools, about the struggle to care for growing children and aging parents, about the continuing challenge of providing equal opportunity for all, and about children moving away from their home towns because good jobs are so hard to find in upstate New York.
Now, I’ve worked on issues like these for a long time. Some of them for 30 years, and I am determined to make a difference for all of you.
You see, I believe our nation owes every responsible citizen and every responsible family the tools that they need to make the most of their own lives. That’s the basic bargain I’ll do my best to honor in the United States Senate.
And to those of you who did not support me, I want you to know that I will work in the Senate for you and all New Yorkers. And to those of you who worked so hard and never lost faith, even in the toughest times, I offer you my undying gratitude.
I will work my heart out for you for the next six years. And I wouldn’t be here if it weren’t for the steady support of so many people. I want to thank Charlie Rangel, Nita Lowey, and the entire New York Democratic congressional delegation, my future colleagues.
I’m very grateful for the support of our Democratic statewide elected officials and my good friends, Carl McCall (ph) and Elliott Spitzer (ph).
I want to thank Shelly Silver (ph) and all the Democratic assembly members, and Marty Connor and all the Democratic members of the state Senate. I want to thank all of my upstate friends who couldn’t be here tonight, including Tony Maccello (ph), Bill Johnson, Jerry Jennings (ph), Mike Breslin (ph), Mark Thomas (ph), all the county chairs and other elected officials.
And thank you to all of my down-state friends, Andy Spano (ph) and the county chairs and all the elected officials, and particularly my friends right here in New York City, the city-wide officials, the borough presidents, the City Council members. And two great friends, former Mayors Ed Koch and David Dinkins.
And somebody just yelled: “Don’t forget Long Island. We got beat up out there.” And I am grateful to everybody from Long Island.
And I want to thank all my friends in the state Democratic Party leadership, Judith Hope (ph), Mike Shell (ph), Denise King (ph).
And to all the hard-working labor leaders who really helped turn out the vote today, Dennis Hughes (ph) and Dennis Rivera (ph), Randy Weingarten (ph), Lee Saunders (ph), Brian McLaughlin (ph), Tom Hobart (ph), Danny Donahue (ph), Ed Malloy (ph), and the other local, state and national labor leaders whose support was so crucial.
And I want to thank all of the people who started volunteering with me from the very beginning.
You knocked on doors, you raised funds, you built rallies, you did everything necessary to bring us to this point.
And today, I want to thank the 25,000 volunteers from all across the state, who started phone banking, knocking on doors, giving out palm cards the minute the polls opened at 6:00 a.m. and didn’t stop until the last voter left. You made a difference in this race, and I’m very grateful to you.
And I want to thank Harold Ickes, my campaign chairman; Bill DeBlasio, my campaign manager; and Gigi Georges, the coordinated campaign director. And I want to thank the best, hardest working campaign staff any candidate has ever had.
And, finally, I want to echo Chuck Schumer in saying that I know I would not be here without my family. And I want to thank my mother and my brothers, and I want to thank my husband and my daughter.
You know, because this campaign was about ideas and issues, we have a lot of work to do.
And I am looking forward to doing that work with all of you, from one end of the state to the other.
I, tonight, am just overwhelmed by the kindness and support that I’ve been given. And I will work my heart out for the next six years for all of you.
Thank you, thank you, thank you, and God bless you all.
Thank you and good night.
Thank you.

It is wonderful to be back in Nevada and at Rancho. I am delighted to be joined by a number of young people who are going to talk with me, and all of you, about their lives and their stories, particularly immigration. I want to acknowledge my friend and Congresswoman Dina Titus for being here, thank you. And it is Cinco De Mayo, so it’s an especially appropriate day to be having this conversation.
I want to begin by thanking everyone at Rancho High School for hosting us today. I am looking forward to hearing from each of our panel participants. I have wonderful memories from my time here in Nevada. I have gone door to door meeting with families not far from this school. I’ve met with a lot of culinary workers and other workers who keep the economy going strong. I accompanied a registered nurse on her 12-hour shift at St. Rose Dominican Hospital and then was very pleased to go back to her home and have dinner with her kids.
I know how hard hit Nevadans were by the Great Recession. This state in particular suffered some very tough blows. There was a much higher than average foreclosure rate, for example. A lot of people lost their jobs or their hours were cut dramatically, which made it more difficult for them to continue to make a good living.
We now see that this state is coming back from these tough economic times. Families have found a lot of different ways to make it work for them. We also saw people once again starting businesses, thinking about sending their kids to college, maybe doing some of those home repairs, maybe putting a little aside for retirement. But we’re not yet back on our feet.
We have certainly climbed out of the hole we were in, but now we have to do more than get by, we have to get ahead and stay ahead. And there are a lot of ways that we have to think about how we do that together. I think that it’s important to recognize that even with all the hard work and sacrifice that so many families made. In many ways, the deck is still stacked for those at the top. And I’m well aware that in Las Vegas, there’s nothing worse than a stacked deck. I want to reshuffle the deck.
I want to be a champion for hardworking Americans, I want to work across party lines, I want to work with the public and private sector, I want people to get back to the good old-fashioned American style of problem solving and setting us back on the right course.
Now to help reshuffle the deck, people have to do their part, they have to step up and take education seriously, they have to be willing to work hard.
My father was a small-business man, and when I say that, he was a really small-business man. A couple day workers, my mom, my brothers, and I. But he understood that hard work was the way forward in the United States, and he made a good living, and I will forever be grateful for that.
Because when families are strong, America is strong, and I am convinced having fought for families going all the way back to my days in law school and ever since, there is nothing is more important.
Now in this campaign I think we have to wage and win four big fights. One is to build the economy of tomorrow, and not yesterday, and that means we have to be really focused on what is going to help prepare young people, and we have to start early. Education is the key, but education in the first years of life is essential because now we know that brain development has formed really by the time a child is three or four.
So we have to do more to make sure that every single child has the best chance to do well in school, to get ahead, to chart his or her own future, to live up to his or her own God-given potential. It is also essential that we strengthen families and communities and that means that we have to finally and once and for all fix our immigration system — this is a family issue, it’s an economic issue too, but it is at heart a family issue. If we claim we are for family, then we have to pull together and resolve the outstanding issues around our broken immigration system.
The American people support comprehensive immigration reform not just because it’s the right thing to do — and it is — but because it will strengthen families, strengthen our economy, and strengthen our country. That’s why we can’t wait any longer, we can’t wait any longer for a path to full and equal citizenship.
Now, this is where I differ with everybody on the Republican side. Make no mistake: Today not a single Republican candidate, announced or potential, is clearly and consistently supporting a path to citizenship. Not one. When they talk about “legal status,” that’s code for “second-class status.”
And we should never forget that this debate is about people who — and you’re going to meet some of them in a second — people who work hard, who love this country, who pay taxes to it and want nothing more than to build better lives for themselves and their children.
We’re talking about the young people here at this table. They’re DREAMers in much more than name. They are kids that any parent would be proud of. I don’t understand how anyone could look at these kids and think we should break up more families or turn away more hard workers with talent.
So I will fight for comprehensive immigration reform and a path to citizenship for you and for families across our country. I will fight to stop partisan attacks on the executive actions that would put DREAMers — including many with us today — at risk of deportation.
And, if Congress refuses to act, as President I will do everything possible under the law to go even further. There are more people — like many parents of DREAMers and others with deep ties and contributions to our communities — who deserve a chance to stay. I’ll fight for them too.
The law currently allows for sympathetic cases to be reviewed, but right now most of these cases have no way to get a real hearing. Therefore we should put in place a simple, straightforward, and accessible way for parents of DREAMers and others with a history of service and contribution to their communities to make their case and be eligible for the same deferred action as their children.
But that’s just the beginning. There’s much more to do to expand and enhance protections for families and communities. To reform immigration enforcement and detention practices so they’re more humane, more targeted, and more effective. And to keep building the pressure and support for comprehensive reform.
On a personal basis, the first time I ever met anyone who was in our country and working I was about 12 years old, as I recall, and through my church was recruited along with some of the other girls in my Sunday school class to serve as babysitters on Saturday for the small children so that the older children could join their parents in the fields. Because, believe it or not, when I was growing up in Chicago, it was farm fields as far as the eye can see. The immigrant workers would come up through Texas, up through the Midwest, up to Chicago, and then through Michigan, and we were asked to help out.
And I remember going out to the camp where the families lived and taking care of the little kids while kids my age were out doing really hard work.
And what stuck in my mind was how at the end of the day, there was a long road at the end of the camp that went out to a dirt road in the middle of the field.
And the bus that had the workers from the field on it that came back in around four or five o’clock in the afternoon, stopped and let the workers off and all these little kids started running down that path to go see their parents and were scooped up by these really really tired people.
And I watched this and just thought, they’re just like me and my brothers when my dad comes home from work and we go out there to see him when he comes back from his day of doing what he has to do to support us. I’ve never gotten that experience or that image out of my mind.
And so for me this is about what kind of people we all are and what kind of country we all have. I am absolutely convinced this is in our economic interest, in the interest of our values, and it’s even in the interest of our long-term security as a nation.
So you know where I stand and there can be no question about it because I will do everything I can as President and during this campaign to make this case.
Now I know there are people who disagree with me, and I want them to have a conversation with me.
The facts are really clear, we know how much people who are working hard contribute to our economy both in what they buy and what they pay in taxes. In fact, in New York, which I know a little bit about because I represented it for eight years and I live there now, our undocumented workers in New York pay more in taxes that some of the biggest corporations in New York. So I’m ready to have this conversation with anyone anywhere.
And now let me turn to those who are living this story I want you to meet them and to talk with them.

Well, I—I love all of you. But here’s what I want you to know. It is rare—it is rare that we have the opportunity we do now to have a real contest of ideas, to really think hard about what the Democratic Party stands for and what we want the future of our country to look like if we do our part to build it.
I am a progressive who get things done for people. I am honored to stand in the long line of American reformers who make up our minds that the status quo is not good enough, that standing still is not an option, and that brings people together to find ways forward that will improve the lives of Americans.
I look back over the years of my involvement, from that very first job I had at the Children’s Defense Fund, and I know—I know what we are capable of doing. I know we can create more good-paying jobs and raise incomes for hard-working Americans again. I know that we can finish the job of universal healthcare coverage for every single man, woman and child. I know—I know we can combat climate change and be the clean energy superpower of the 21st century. I know we can make our education system work for every one of our children, especially those who come with disadvantages. I know we can make college affordable and get student debt off the backs of young people. And I know we can protect our rights—women’s rights, gay rights, voting rights, immigrant rights, workers’ rights. I know, too, we can stand up to the gun lobby and get commonsense gun safety measures.
And how do we do that? We do that—we do that by securing the nomination, and then we do it by winning and going into that White House, as others before have, determined to push forward on the great goals and values that unite us as Americans.
I congratulate—I congratulate my esteemed friends and opponents. I wish Governor O’Malley the very best. He’s a great public servant who has served Maryland and our country. And I am excited about really getting into the debate with Senator Sanders about the best way forward to fight for us and America. In the last few weeks—in the last few weeks, we finally began to have what I think is one of the most important substantive conversations that the Democratic Party could have. And I am—I am thrilled at all of the people who are playing a part in that. I know that we may have differences of opinion about how best to achieve our goals. But I believe we have a very clear idea that the Democratic Party and this campaign stands for what is best in America. And we have to be united.
When it is all said and done, we have to be united against a Republican vision and candidates who would drive us apart and divide us. That is not who we are, my friends. I followed their campaign very closely. I understand what they’re appealing to, and I intend to stand against it. I will not—I will not let their divisiveness, their efforts to rip away the progress that we’ve made, be successful, because we can’t afford that.
So, as I stand here tonight, breathing a big sigh of relief—thank you, Iowa—I want you to know I will keep doing what I have done my entire life. I will keep standing up for you. I will keep fighting for you. I will always work to achieve the America that I believe in, where the promise of that dream that we hold out to our children and our grandchildren never fades, but inspires generations to come. Join me. Let’s go win the nomination! Thank you all, and God bless you!

I am honored to be here tonight. A proud mother. A proud Democrat. A proud American. And a proud supporter of Barack Obama.
My friends, it is time to take back the country we love.
Whether you voted for me, or voted for Barack, the time is now to unite as a single party with a single purpose. We are on the same team, and none of us can sit on the sidelines.
This is a fight for the future. And it's a fight we must win.
I haven't spent the past 35 years in the trenches advocating for children, campaigning for universal health care, helping parents balance work and family, and fighting for women's rights at home and around the world . . . to see another Republican in the White House squander the promise of our country and the hopes of our people.
And you haven't worked so hard over the last 18 months, or endured the last eight years, to suffer through more failed leadership.
No way. No how. No McCain.
Barack Obama is my candidate. And he must be our President.
Tonight we need to remember what a Presidential election is really about. When the polls have closed, and the ads are finally off the air, it comes down to you — the American people, your lives, and your children's futures.
For me, it's been a privilege to meet you in your homes, your workplaces, and your communities. Your stories reminded me everyday that America's greatness is bound up in the lives of the American people — your hard work, your devotion to duty, your love for your children, and your determination to keep going, often in the face of enormous obstacles.
You taught me so much, you made me laugh, and . . . you even made me cry. You allowed me to become part of your lives. And you became part of mine.
I will always remember the single mom who had adopted two kids with autism, didn't have health insurance and discovered she had cancer. But she greeted me with her bald head painted with my name on it and asked me to fight for health care.
I will always remember the young man in a Marine Corps t-shirt who waited months for medical care and said to me: "Take care of my buddies; a lot of them are still over there....and then will you please help take care of me?"
I will always remember the boy who told me his mom worked for the minimum wage and that her employer had cut her hours. He said he just didn't know what his family was going to do.
I will always be grateful to everyone from all fifty states, Puerto Rico and the territories, who joined our campaign on behalf of all those people left out and left behind by the Bush Administrtation.
To my supporters, my champions — my sisterhood of the traveling pantsuits – from the bottom of my heart: Thank you.
You never gave in. You never gave up. And together we made history.
Along the way, America lost two great Democratic champions who would have been here with us tonight. One of our finest young leaders, Arkansas Democratic Party Chair, Bill Gwatney, who believed with all his heart that America and the South could be and should be Democratic from top to bottom.
And Congresswoman Stephanie Tubbs Jones, a dear friend to many of us, a loving mother and courageous leader who never gave up her quest to make America fairer and smarter, stronger and better. Steadfast in her beliefs, a fighter of uncommon grace, she was an inspiration to me and to us all.
Our heart goes out to Stephanie's son, Mervyn, Jr, and Bill's wife, Rebecca, who traveled to Denver to join us at our convention.
Bill and Stephanie knew that after eight years of George Bush, people are hurting at home, and our standing has eroded around the world. We have a lot of work ahead.
Jobs lost, houses gone, falling wages, rising prices. The Supreme Court in a right-wing headlock and our government in partisan gridlock. The biggest deficit in our nation's history. Money borrowed from the Chinese to buy oil from the Saudis.
Putin and Georgia, Iraq and Iran.
I ran for President to renew the promise of America. To rebuild the middle class and sustain the American Dream, to provide the opportunity to work hard and have that work rewarded, to save for college, a home and retirement, to afford the gas and groceries and still have a little left over each month.
To promote a clean energy economy that will create millions of green collar jobs.
To create a health care system that is universal, high quality, and affordable so that parents no longer have to choose between care for themselves or their children or be stuck in dead end jobs simply to keep their insurance.
To create a world class education system and make college affordable again.
To fight for an America defined by deep and meaningful equality - from civil rights to labor rights, from women's rights to gay rights, from ending discrimination to promoting unionization to providing help for the most important job there is: caring for our families. To help every child live up to his or her God-given potential.
To make America once again a nation of immigrants and a nation of laws.
To bring fiscal sanity back to Washington and make our government an instrument of the public good, not of private plunder.
To restore America's standing in the world, to end the war in Iraq, bring our troops home and honor their service by caring for our veterans.
And to join with our allies to confront our shared challenges, from poverty and genocide to terrorism and global warming.
Most of all, I ran to stand up for all those who have been invisible to their government for eight long years.
Those are the reasons I ran for President. Those are the reasons I support Barack Obama. And those are the reasons you should too.
I want you to ask yourselves: Were you in this campaign just for me? Or were you in it for that young Marine and others like him? Were you in it for that mom struggling with cancer while raising her kids? Were you in it for that boy and his mom surviving on the minimum wage? Were you in it for all the people in this country who feel invisible?
We need leaders once again who can tap into that special blend of American confidence and optimism that has enabled generations before us to meet our toughest challenges. Leaders who can help us show ourselves and the world that with our ingenuity, creativity, and innovative spirit, there are no limits to what is possible in America.
This won't be easy. Progress never is. But it will be impossible if we don't fight to put a Democrat in the White House.
We need to elect Barack Obama because we need a President who understands that America can't compete in a global economy by padding the pockets of energy speculators, while ignoring the workers whose jobs have been shipped overseas. We need a President who understands that we can't solve the problems of global warming by giving windfall profits to the oil companies while ignoring opportunities to invest in new technologies that will build a green economy.
We need a President who understands that the genius of America has always depended on the strength and vitality of the middle class.
Barack Obama began his career fighting for workers displaced by the global economy. He built his campaign on a fundamental belief that change in this country must start from the ground up, not the top down. He knows government must be about "We the people" not "We the favored few."
And when Barack Obama is in the White House, he'll revitalize our economy, defend the working people of America, and meet the global challenges of our time. Democrats know how to do this. As I recall, President Clinton and the Democrats did it before. And President Obama and the Democrats will do it again.
He'll transform our energy agenda by creating millions of green jobs and building a new, clean energy future. He'll make sure that middle class families get the tax relief they deserve. And I can't wait to watch Barack Obama sign a health care plan into law that covers every single American.
Barack Obama will end the war in Iraq responsibly and bring our troops home – a first step to repairing our alliances around the world.
And he will have with him a terrific partner in Michelle Obama. Anyone who saw Michelle's speech last night knows she will be a great First Lady for America.
Americans are also fortunate that Joe Biden will be at Barack Obama's side. He is a strong leader and a good man. He understands both the economic stresses here at home and the strategic challenges abroad. He is pragmatic, tough, and wise. And, of course, Joe will be supported by his wonderful wife, Jill.
They will be a great team for our country.
Now, John McCain is my colleague and my friend.
He has served our country with honor and courage.
But we don't need four more years . . . of the last eight years.
More economic stagnation ...and less affordable health care.
More high gas prices ...and less alternative energy.
More jobs getting shipped overseas ...and fewer jobs created here.
More skyrocketing debt ...home foreclosures ...and mounting bills that are crushing our middle class families.
More war . . . less diplomacy.
More of a government where the privileged come first ...and everyone else comes last.
John McCain says the economy is fundamentally sound. John McCain doesn't think that 47 million people without health insurance is a crisis. John McCain wants to privatize Social Security. And in 2008, he still thinks it's okay when women don't earn equal pay for equal work.
With an agenda like that, it makes sense that George Bush and John McCain will be together next week in the Twin Cities. Because these days they're awfully hard to tell apart.
America is still around after 232 years because we have risen to the challenge of every new time, changing to be faithful to our values of equal opportunity for all and the common good.
And I know what that can mean for every man, woman, and child in America. I'm a United States Senator because in 1848 a group of courageous women and a few brave men gathered in Seneca Falls, New York, many traveling for days and nights, to participate in the first convention on women's rights in our history.
And so dawned a struggle for the right to vote that would last 72 years, handed down by mother to daughter to granddaughter – and a few sons and grandsons along the way.
These women and men looked into their daughters' eyes, imagined a fairer and freer world, and found the strength to fight. To rally and picket. To endure ridicule and harassment. To brave violence and jail.
And after so many decades – 88 years ago on this very day – the 19th amendment guaranteeing women the right to vote would be forever enshrined in our Constitution.
My mother was born before women could vote. But in this election my daughter got to vote for her mother for President.
This is the story of America. Of women and men who defy the odds and never give up.
How do we give this country back to them?
By following the example of a brave New Yorker , a woman who risked her life to shepherd slaves along the Underground Railroad.
And on that path to freedom, Harriett Tubman had one piece of advice.
If you hear the dogs, keep going.
If you see the torches in the woods, keep going.
If they're shouting after you, keep going.
Don't ever stop. Keep going.
If you want a taste of freedom, keep going.
Even in the darkest of moments, ordinary Americans have found the faith to keep going.
I've seen it in you. I've seen it in our teachers and firefighters, nurses and police officers, small business owners and union workers, the men and women of our military – you always keep going.
We are Americans. We're not big on quitting.
But remember, before we can keep going, we have to get going by electing Barack Obama president.
We don't have a moment to lose or a vote to spare.
Nothing less than the fate of our nation and the future of our children hang in the balance.
I want you to think about your children and grandchildren come election day. And think about the choices your parents and grandparents made that had such a big impact on your life and on the life of our nation.
We've got to ensure that the choice we make in this election honors the sacrifices of all who came before us, and will fill the lives of our children with possibility and hope.
That is our duty, to build that bright future, and to teach our children that in America there is no chasm too deep, no barrier too great – and no ceiling too high – for all who work hard, never back down, always keep going, have faith in God, in our country, and in each other.
Thank you so much. God bless America and Godspeed to you all.

Well, I think all Americans should be concerned.  It's clear that Donald Trump is running a very cynical campaign, pitting groups of Americans against one another.  He is trafficking in hate and fear.  He is playing to our worst instincts rather than our angels of our better nature. 
He actually incites violence in the way that he urges his audience on, you know, talking about punching people, offering to pay legal bills. 
And then on the specifics, you know, we know that he has been incredibly bigoted towards so many groups.  He talks about deporting 11-12 million immigrants, we are a nation built on immigrants.  He talks about preventing Muslims from coming into our country, we believe in religious freedom.
There is just so much of what he is doing that I think we all have to reject.  Because, it is so at odds with our values.  You don't make America great by tearing down everything that made America great. 
And so let's stand up and with one voice reject that. 
Well, let's start with what I think is the truth.  Donald Trump is responsible for what happens at his events.  He is the person who has for months now been not just inciting violence, but applauding violence.  The images of the, you know, young African-American protester being attacked totally without any provocation whatsoever, and having Donald Trump say that he would pay the legal bills of the attacker.
So clearly people who engage in protests should follow civil disobedience principles, and should be peaceful, should be nonviolent, but I do think that, as I said the other day, what Trump has done is like a case of political arson. 
You know, he has lit the fire, and then he throws his hands up and claims that he shouldn't be held responsible, and he should be held responsible.
Roland, I certainly agree. I have been an advocate for opening up unions, businesses, academic institutions, every institution in our country, and it is, for me, a special commitment that we would open up apprenticeships for the full diversity of our country.
We should to the whole gamut, you know? I've been now in a number of training facilities, and at least during my visits, and this goes back to my time in the Senate, there is a very diverse representation.
Now, we do need to work much more diligently to open up all of the trades, all of the businesses, and you will certainly see me pushing that. And, there's going to be so much work if I have my way, if I'm so fortunate to be president, that we're going to need a much bigger workforce to do infrastructure, advanced manufacturing, clean energy jobs. And, it would be counterproductive as well as wrong to keep anybody out.
So, I have a tax credit to expand apprenticeship programs. You're right, we've got to focus on those who already have the skills, but we're going to need a big pipeline.
And, I came from a really interesting meeting I had in Marion, Ohio, before coming here. And, I talked to people who have been running some great tech programs. I know Senator brown is supporting something called RamTech (ph), and it is really focused on making the case, and I need your help in the media to make the case, there are very many good jobs in the trades but a lot of people are not really encouraged to go that direction.
Please do it because right now in Ohio, I was told there are 60,000 jobs available for skilled work in the trades and these are jobs that go $40,000, $50,000, $60,000 to start.
I met a woman welder in Merion who, you know, she got into the program, got her certification in welding, and she's already moved from $14 dollars an hour to $19 dollars an hour with more increases in sight. So, we have got to open up the trades, but we also have to encourage more people to think about those as an occupation profession.
Well, I just finished speaking about this at the Democratic Party dinner. And I think, number one, we have to take much more aggressive action to stop the dumping.  I believe that the dumping is illegal, and that we have to summon up the political and the legal arguments to take it on. 
And this is not new for me.  I fought for our steel companies and workers in New York when I was a senator, and I testified before the International Trade Commission.  And this is something that I know Congresswoman Beatty and Senator Brown and I all agree on which is, you know, you shouldn't have to be a business or a union or a worker to bring these kinds of unfair trade practices to a legal forum. 
I want the government the do it.  I want the United States government to stand up for steel, to stand up for the companies and the workers.  Now I also have proposed for the first time ever a trade prosecutor who would report directly to the president, and more investigators so that we don't wait until the damage is done, we try to get in early to prevent it, and then make it possible for there to be some kind of recovery. 
I happen to think a steel industry is in America's national security interests as well as our economic interests.  And so what I will tell you is that in addition to enforcing laws and trying to really go after the major rule-breaker in the global economy, namely China, we have to look at how we keep a steel industry going. 
Standing here tonight, I can't tell you exactly what that would look like, but I can pledge to you that I'm committed to keeping a steel industry and steel workers working in Ohio and America. 
No.  No, and I don't think it is an either/or kind of question.  I believe that we have to use every tool at our disposal, our diplomacy, our development, and our strong cultural influence around the world as well as defense. 
And I think in the world in which we are living today, it is really important for the president to build coalitions, to support our friends, our partners, our allies, to be able to take on challenges that confront them. 
Obviously, force should be always a last resort, not a first choice.  And I will give you a quick example.  You know, when President Obama went into office and I became the secretary of state, the Iranians had mastered the nuclear fuel cycle. 
They had built covert fuel facilities.  They had stocked them with centrifuges, all of that had happened while George W. Bush was president.  And we had done, you know, sanctions, and everything that we could think of as the United States government and Congress, but it had not stopped them. 
And there were a lot of other countries in the region who said they would take military action if necessary. So I led the effort to impose sanctions on Iran, to really bring them to the negotiating table, the negotiations started under my watch, ably concluded under Secretary Kerry, to put a lid on the Iranian nuclear weapons program. 
That is my preference, smart power.  Using our intelligence, our diplomatic efforts, everything we can bring to bear.  But leading the rest of the world, not going off and doing it on our own, to try to end conflicts where we can, to prevent them where we can, and if you have a situation like we do currently in Syria and Iraq, provide support as we are doing for others to carry the conflict forward through military action. 
So that is in a kind of the capsule how I see what the next president should do. 
You know, this is such a profoundly difficult question.  And what I have said and what I continue to believe is that the states have proven themselves incapable of carrying out fair trials that give any defendant all of the rights a defendant should have, all of the support that the defendant's lawyer should have.
And I have said I would breathe a sigh of relief if either the Supreme Court or the states, themselves, began to eliminate the death penalty. 
Where I end up is this, and maybe it is distinction that is hard to support, but at this point, given the challenges we face from terrorist activities primarily in our country that end up under federal jurisdiction for very limited purposes, I think that it can still be held in reserve for those. 
And the kind of crimes that I am thinking of are the bombing at Oklahoma City, where an American terrorist blew up the government building, killing, as I recall, 158 Americans, including a number of children who were in the preschool program. 
The plotters and the people who carried out the attacks on 9/11, but a very limited use of it in cases where there has been horrific mass killings.  That is really the exception that I still am struggling with, and that would only be in the federal system. 
But what happened to you was a travesty, and I just can't even imagine what you went through and how terrible those days and nights must have been for all of those years. 
And I know that all of us are so regretful that you or any person has to go through what you did.  And I hope that now that you are standing here before us that you will have whatever path in life you choose going forward and that you will get the support you deserve to have. 
Wow, Thank you for asking me that, because. May I ask you, before you were buying your family health insurance in the individual family market? Were you getting it through the employer? How were you insured before?
So you were going to a broker and buying a health insurance policy. 
And in effect, it nearly tripled after you went on to the exchange and bought a policy under the Affordable Care Act, is that right? 
OK.  Well, first of all, let me say I want very much to get the costs down, and that is going to be my mission, because I do think that for many, many people, but there are exceptions like what you are telling me, having the Affordable Care Act has reduced costs, has created a real guarantee of insurance, because if you'd had a pre-existing condition under the old system, you wouldn't have gotten affordable insurance.
So it has done a lot of really good things, but, it has become increasingly clear that we are going to have to get the costs down.  And what I would like to see happen for you and your family is that if we can get the co-pays down, the deductibles down, get the prescription drug costs under control, that you would find an affordable plan on your exchange. 
And one thing that I would like you to do, and I'm not saying it's going to make a difference, but I would like you to just go shopping on that exchange.  As I understand it, Ohio has the federal exchange, is that right, Joyce?  Because they did not set up a state exchange.
So you have the federal exchange.  And to go on and keep looking to see what the prices are, because we have to get more competition back into the insurance market.  One thing that I want to work on with my friends from Congress who are here is we've got the get more non-profits that are capable of selling insurance back into the insurance market. 
You know, Blue Cross and Blue Shield used to be non-profits.  And then they transferred themselves into for-profit companies.  And there was some effort made under the Affordable Care Act to get some competition from non-profit institutions, some of them worked and a lot of them didn't.
I want to know what we can do, because if you could get a range of insurers, some of who were not-for-profit companies, that would lower costs. 
So there is a number of things I am looking at.  And what I want to assure you and your family of is I will do everything I can as president, working with members of Congress where necessary, to try to get the costs down. 
But I do want you to keep shopping, because what you are telling me is much higher than what I hear from other families, and so I want to be sure that if there is a better option out there for you, you're going to be able to take advantage of it.  
And then I'll work as hard as I can to get the costs down for everybody, and that includes prescription cost drugs, which are skyrocketing and increasing costs for everything else. 
Well, your description of the problem is absolutely right.  And the very first speech I gave in this campaign was about criminal justice and incarceration reform.  So there are a number of things that I have laid out. 
I want to just give you a sort of the overview, but please go to my Web site, hillaryclinton.com, that lays out my comprehensive approach. 
One in three African-American men, if the trends that we see today continue, will spend some time in jail or prison.  That is absolutely unacceptable.  There is no justification for it.  There is no excuse for it.
And I have been going around speaking out that an African-American young man is more likely to be arrested, charged, convicted and incarcerated for doing exactly the same thing as a white man who is not.
And, what that means is we have got to be honest with ourselves. We have systemic racism that is really at work inside of the criminal justice system. And, we have got to be willing To stand up - and question these inequities, and then go about the business of ridding them. We need to divert many more people out of the jail and prison system into diversion programs, job programs, skills programs. Where are doing this, although it is on too small a scale, it works.
And, we need to have much more in the way of treatment and help for people who have addictions, who have mental health issues so that they can be helped, not incarcerated. We need to end private prisons; they are a shameful blight on our prison system - and, if we can eliminate the school-to-prison pipeline, and substitute a cradle-to-college pipeline that starts with early childhood education it starts with more health, earlier on, then we can begin closing prisons.
And, I guess the final thing I would say about this overview is I really believe states have got to stop building prisons and start investing in education. Elementary, secondary, and higher education.
You know, as I said in the debate when asked this - because so much of what governs fracking right now is within state and local control, and the federal government, I think, has an important role to play including advocating for what you said that I had put forward, which is to give local communities the say over it.
I also said this, we need much more scientific research, but here's what we know. We know that methane releases are bad, they're bad for the environment, they're bad for greenhouse gas emissions. We know that if water is contaminated, that's bad. And, we can't allow that go forward.
We know that there is a loophole in the law that I disagree with that permits the fracking companies to not have to disclose the chemicals they're using in fracking.
We deserve to know; I think we have a right to know. So, I am going to push very tough rules. Now, I've got to figure out what I can do on the federal level as opposed to what we're going to have to work at on the state level.
Oklahoma, which, as you know, has been very pro-fracking, has suffered from tremors, little earthquakes around the state. 
And there is growing scientific evidence that fracking is connected to, I don't want to say cause, because the scientists have not reached that, but certainly connected to these tremors.
And so now even Oklahoma is saying, hey, wait a minute, we'd better stop and take a hard look at this.  So I will do everything I can as president to set the rules, to set the regulations, to try to figure out how to influence states.
I'm not sure given the present political makeup we could pass a federal law to end fracking, but we sure can try to regulate it very effectively under the rules we already have that give us federal jurisdictions over some of these chemicals and releases.  
So that is what I am going to try to do.  And, you know, I know that others say, well, we are going to ban it. I just want to tell you, I'm going to do everything I can to regulate it and to try to limit it.  No president can stand up before you and say, I'm going to ban it. 
We have got too many layers of law that we have got to work through and regulation we've got to deal with. 
And that's what I'm trying to say very clearly, you know, I don't want to make a promise I can't keep.  I want to tell you what I think that I can do as president to be your ally in trying to stop that at the local level. 
Well, Doctor. Let me give you a little bit of context.  Where we are right now, before everybody votes on Tuesday, I am the only candidate who has gotten more votes than Trump.  I have 600,000 more votes than Donald Trump. 
And I am building a broad-based, inclusive campaign that I think is the best way to defeat, by convincing people that this really is the highest stakes election they have ever been involved in, and they have got to, whether they have ever voted before or not, to come out and vote against Donald Trump and for me. 
And because I do have more votes than everybody, anybody, I believe that I have been developing the base that is going to give me the chance to do that. 
Secondly, you know, one of my advantages, if I am so fortunate enough to be the Democratic nominee, is that the Republicans have been after me for 25 years.  And  there isn't anything they haven't already said about me.  And in the course of dealing with all of this incoming fire from them, I have developed a pretty thick skin.  I am not new to the national arena, and I think that whoever goes up against Donald Trump better be ready. 
And I feel I am the best-prepared and ready candidate to take him on.
I am not new to the national arena, and I think that whoever goes up against Donald Trump better be ready, and I feel I am the best prepared and ready candidate to take him on.
Finally, I really believe that there are going to be a lot of arguments to make against him that we can look forward to, I'm not going to spill the beans right now.
But, suffice it to say that there are many arguments that we can use against him.
But, one argument that I am uniquely qualified to bring, because of my service as Secretary of State is what his presidency would mean to our country and our standing in the world.
I am already receiving messages from leaders - I'm having foreign leaders ask if they can endorse me to stop Donald Trump.
I mean, this is up to Americans, thank you very much, but I get what you're saying.
We're holding that in reserve too.
But, I - you know, lots of times foreign policy doesn't play as big a role as I think it should, you know? The wonderful question that the woman asked me before about the use of military force and how you make those tough decisions, you know?
Only the hard choices come to the president. If they're not really hard somebody along the way has a chance to, you know, make a decision.
So, when you end up in the Situation Room on a serious foreign policy group like I was there with the small group advising the President whether to go after Bin Laden, it takes incredible seriousness, diligence, judgement, a temperament that is not going to be pushed one way or another depending upon who said what to you today.
And, I believe that I will have an opportunity to really focus in on how dangerous a Donald Trump presidency would be for our standing, for our safety for the peace for the world, and I think we can be successful doing that.
ou know, I want - I want everybody to know what you know, which is that on average 90 people a day are killed by guns in our country, that is 33,000 people a year.  And a shocking number of those killed and injured are children, some of them intentionally, and some of them accidentally. 
So here's what I believe with all of my heart, because I think that we are in a crisis when it comes to gun violence.  It is truly an epidemic.  And there is no doubt in my mind that we've got to do more to get more common sense gun safety reforms enacted in America. 
So I'm not saying that what I propose will solve everything, but I believe, and there is evidence for this, that failing to do anything, which is what we are doing right now, will only lead to more terrible loss of life. 
So we do need comprehensive background checks, and we need to close these loopholes, the so-called gun show loophole, the online loophole, what's now called the "Charleston loophole."
A lot of the guns that are used for the kind of random gun violence that we see too much of in so many communities are obtained illegally.  They are obtained from sellers who don't really care where the guns end up or what they're used for. 
And we've got to crack down on the makers and sellers of guns.  They should be held accountable for the use of their products and exercise more care as to how they end up in the hands of the people who use them. 
We have to end what this terrible law that was passed when I was in the Senate.  I voted against it.  My opponent voted for it, which gave immunity from liability to gun-makers and sellers. 
Right now the parents of the Sandy Hook victims are trying to sue the gun-maker and seller, as much as anything to try to do whatever they can to turn their grief into…
Right now the parents of the Sandy Hook victims are trying to sue the gun-maker and seller, as much as anything to try to do whatever they can to turn their grief into action and prevent other families from experiencing the horror of what they went through.  
We have with us tonight some of the mothers of the movement, mothers who have lost their children to violence, to police violence, and to senseless gun violence.  And I've gotten to know and just admire these women so much. 
And when you hear their stories or when you hear the stories, like you just told us, about children being killed, it - you just cry out and say, what are we doing as a country? 
And I believe what I am proposing is common sense.  I agree with what the president is trying to do.  And the obstacle is the gun lobby.  And the gun lobby exists for the purpose of scaring and intimidating people into doing what they want done. 
So we've got to figure out how we come together to try to take this on.  And, you know, maybe I've just - I've just met too many families now who have lost loved ones to gun violence, in some of the big mass shootings literally from Columbine to Sandy Hook to Aurora in Colorado, just the list goes on. 
The nine victims in Mother Emanuel murdered by a young man they welcomed into their Bible study, and he was so driven by hatred and racism.  He sat there, listened to the scripture and then pulled out the gun, he should not have been able to get except for one of the loopholes, and murdered those nine faithful people. 
So I'm going to take them on.  I don't know how much we can get done, but I am sick and tired of these murders and killings and random horrible incidents of gun violence. 
Well, first of all, I was happy to carry those states you mentioned, and I carried the white vote in those states too, that voted Democratic now, I don't want to get carried away here. 
Look, we have serious economic problems in many parts of our country.  And Roland is absolutely right.  Instead of dividing people the way Donald Trump does, let's reunite around policies that will bring jobs and opportunities to all these underserved poor communities. 
So for example, I'm the only candidate which has a policy about how to bring economic opportunity using clean renewable energy as the key into coal country.  Because we're going to put a lot of coal miners and coal companies out of business, right, Tim (ph)? 
And we're going to make it clear that we don't want to forget those people.  Those people labored in those mines for generations, losing their health, often losing their lives to turn on our lights and power our factories. 
Now we've got to move away from coal and all the other fossil fuels, but I don't want to move away from the people who did the best they could to produce the energy that we relied on. 
So whether it's coal country or Indian country or poor urban areas, there is a lot of poverty in America.  We have gone backwards.  We were moving in the right direction.  In the '90s more people were lifted out of poverty than any time in recent history.
Because of the terrible economic policies of the Bush administration, President Obama was left with the worst financial crisis since the Great Depression, and people fell back into poverty because they lost jobs, they lost homes, they lost opportunities, and hope.  
So I am passionate about this, which is why I have put forward specific plans about how we incentivize more jobs, more investment in poor communities, and put people to work. 
Well, I guess what I really mean by that is that a lot of the - a lot of the work that goes into the campaign and a lot of the, you know, demands that you are faced with in a campaign, I think are challenging and I have worked at it, tried to get better at it, but I'm much better when I actually have a job to do rather than trying to get the job, you know?
I don't want to be hired to be a constant candidate. I want to be hired to be the president because I think that I, at this moment in our countries history, bring the combination of skills and understanding and experience that can really be put to work immediately to do all parts of the job.
But, you know, look, I watched my husband campaign. I watched President Obama campaign, it is poetry. I mean, it is just.
I mean, I get carried away, and I've seen them a million times, you know? I go, Oh my gosh, you know? Both of them.
You know, that's not necessarily my forte, but I think what I have always been able to do is to really produce results in every job that I've had. You know, one of the funny things I've had that goes back to the question the doctor asked. I have a whole archive of nice things Republicans have said about me, including Donald Trump. And, it's about working with me. It's about coming together to find common ground.
And, so when I start running for something, you know, the immediately start attacking me, but the work, you know? Whether it's Senator, Secretary of State, or even First Lady, I really love the work. I love trying to help people, you know?
I was raised to believe you do all the good you can to all the people you can for as long as you can. And, that is how I feel I am really trying to approach running for, and hopefully being elected president.

Newspapers from Miami to Portland agree:Hillary is the best choice to be the Democratic nominee.hrc.io/1RtG0Nw1
It’s clearer than ever that this may be the mostconsequential election of our lifetimes.pbs.twimg.com/media/Cd7ztlkXIAAfVLM…1
“She is one of the most experienced people toever run for president.” —@azcentral hrc.io/1R7gQHs7
This campaign is powered by more than 1million people who’ve donated to elect Hillary.hrc.io/1RsRdOm9
Congratulations Air Force General LoriRobinson—America's first female combatant commander.hrc.io/1pQCJBW19
knows USmust prepare NOW:
Hillary Clinton ha luchado por la reformamigratoria por años—y no va a parar ahora. Ve el video:amp.twimg.com/v/5d71e5fd-a4d6-49f8-…23
We’ve got to step up as a country and dealwith this. The time to take action against the Zika virus is rightnow.
A super quick update on the Democraticprimary race:
I’m grateful for what we’ve built. We have atough fight ahead with stakes that couldn’t be higher. Join in:hrc.io/1UaBZ7x
I'm incredibly grateful that people are givingwhat they can afford—94% of donations are $100 or under.
I'm told the number just ticked over: As of afew minutes ago, 1,000,000 people have pitched in to be apart of this campaign. Thank you.
Empezar y manejar un negocio pequeñodebería ser más
Donald Trump isn’t who we are. We’re betterthan this.
Nearly a million people have chipped in topower this campaign. Here's why:
Are you with Hillary? So are they ⬇️ Enter for achance to meet Hillary, George, and Amal at the Clooneys'home.
While the other candidates "seem downrightterrified of the gun lobby, Hillary seems fearless."—@GabbyGiffords
Hate isn't an American value. Division isn'tsomething to be glorified. We can’t let Trump be our nextpresident.
No es una coincidencia que sus palabrashayan resultado en tantos actos odiosos.
"An extraordinary power is unleashed whenwomen reach out to their neighbors and find commonground."
The balance of the Supreme Court hinges onthis election. Here’s what’s at stake:
It's 2016. Every student should have access tocomputer science
Climate change, education, equal pay—amathematician and a scientist from Florida share what theyvoted for:
Trump is fanning the flames of chaos andviolence. That's not leadership—it’s dangerous.hrc.io/1QZ1cis
Hillary es una líder que va a luchar para todos.Ella tiene la experiencia y la dedicación para liderar el
High
Congress shouldn't block states from givingfamilies information about their food—glad the senatestopped this bill.
We’re not going to succeed by dividing thiscountry between “us” and “them.” We’re in this
Los seis mejores momentos del discurso deHillary Clinton.
Statement on President Obama's nominationof Judge Merrick Garland to the Supreme
We did it. To every volunteer, supporter, anddonor who worked your heart out: Thank you. Let's do
Florida, North Carolina, Ohio, Illinois, Missouri:We did it. And together, we're going to win this
Text ImWithHer to 47246 to tell Hillary you'reby her side all the way to the White
Love you back,
Our next president has to bring our countrytogether.
Let everyone know that you’re prouder thanever to stand with Hillary. Chip in $10 to get a limited-editionbutton →
If you knocked on doors, talked to your friends,pitched in, or voted—tonight is your victory. Thank you.
"If we lift each other up instead of tearing eachother down, there’s nothing we can’t accomplish together."—Hillary in
To be be great, we can’t be small. We can’tlose what made America great in the first
Our next president has to bring our countrytogether. We should be breaking down barriers, not
We’re going to stand up for American workersand make sure no one takes advantage of us—not China,Wall Street, or over-paid
Hard-working Americans deserve a presidentwith both the ideas and the know-how to create good jobswith rising incomes here in the
"Making differences in people’s lives comesfirst because Americans everywhere are hungry for solutions."—Hillary in
Thank you,
There's never been a more important time tohave Hillary's back. Add your name to help secure thenomination:
The results are in: We won North
Text CONGRATS to 47246 to tell Hillary you’reready to win this nomination
This is big. We just won
Honored by Lezley's support. She is turningher grief into resolve after suffering as no mother ever should.-H
Waiting in line to vote? Stay put—Hillary’scounting on you! RT to tell a
FL, IL, MO, NC, &amp; OH: Hillary needs younow! If you haven't voted yet, grab a friend and head to thepolls:
Time for some delegate math. Here’s why itmatters that Hillary won the Northern Mariana Islands
Happy birthday to Supreme Court Justice,women’s rights advocate, and icon Ruth Bader
Live in FL, IL, MO, NC, or OH? Text WHERE to47246 to find your polling place then go
"We can open the door to every person in thiscountry again." —@billclinton
No one should work full-time and struggle toget by. Idahoans, like all Americans, deserve a living wage.
Relieved Atlantic drilling is now off the table.Time to do the next right thing and protect the Arctic, too.hrc.io/1UdlR4D
Want to help win in FL, IL, MO, NC, and OH?Find your friends on Facebook and make sure they get to thepolls today!
You’re welcome at (the real) HQ any time,@BroadCity.
We’re live blogging mini-Super Tuesday onFacebook as FL, IL, MO, NC, and OH head to the polls.Follow along:
Live in FL IL, MO, NC, or OH and havequestions about voting today? Call the hotline:
FL, IL, MO, NC, and OH: Hillary's counting onyou to vote today. Confirm your polling place:
The right to vote is the heart of our democracy.We should restore it to those who have served theirsentences.
Today, our public schools are more segregatedthan they were in 1968. That’s unacceptable for our kids andfor our
Moved by the families I met in Chicago whohave lost children to gun violence. Their grief is a call toaction. -H
It’s not enough to make college moreaffordable. We need to help people with the student debt theyalready have.
Companies that get tax breaks or governmentinvestments shouldn’t be walking out on Americancommunities.
Donald Trump is fanning the flames ofviolence. That isn’t leadership. It’s dangerous.
"Donald Trump is running a cynical campaignof hate and fear... he's encouraging violence and
on today's showabout the #FlintWaterCrisis
Joining @IAmSteveHarvey today to talk aboutthe Flint water crisis and how to make sure this neverhappens again.
Want to help Hillary win FL, IL, MO, NC, andOH? Tune in for a phone bank training on Facebook Live andget calling!
Four generations of Ohio women. Four reasonsto vote for Hillary.
¡Hillary necesita tu apoyo! Confirma en dóndepuedes votar aquí → hrc.io/locate
You don’t make America great by getting rid ofeverything that made America great in the first
We make it about as hard to combine familyand work as we could. We can change
It's absolutely unacceptable that the gunindustry can't be held accountable when they endangerAmericans.
"I am sick and tired of these murders andrandom acts of gun violence." —Hillary
"Failing to do anything—which is what we'redoing now—will only lead to more loss of life." —Hillary ongun violence prevention
"Whoever goes up against Donald Trumpbetter be ready. I am the best prepared candidate to do that."—Hillary
Let's end the school-to-prison pipeline andbuild a cradle-to-college pipeline. We've got to stop buildingprisons and invest in
Systemic racism is at work in our criminaljustice system. We've got to stand up and end theseinequities.
"Donald Trump is responsible for whathappens at his events. He’s been not just inciting violence,but applauding it." —Hillary
At our best, Americans have rejecteddemagogues and fear mongers. Donald Trump is not who weare.
Trump is running a cynical campaign—trafficking in hate and fear, and playing to our worstinstincts. We're better than this.
Donald Trump is not who we
“My campaign isn’t about building walls. It’sabout breaking down all the barriers holding people back.”—Hillary in
"If you want to shut [Donald Trump] down,then let’s vote him down. And let’s raise up a better future forour country." —Hillary in
"We can criticize and protest Mr. Trump all wewant...but none of that matters if we don’t also show up at thepolls." —Hillary in
"Donald Trump is not who we are." —Hillary
You don’t make America great by getting rid ofeverything that made America great in the first
"After stoking every fire he can think of, Trumpencourages his supporters to beat up anybody who disagreeswith him." —Hillary in
“Donald Trump is running a cynical campaignof hate and fear for one reason: to get votes." —Hillary in
Watch live now: Hillary just took the stage atthe @OHDems 2016 Legacy dinner →
Nearly a million people have chipped in topower this campaign. Here's why:
Los colegios comunitarios públicos deberíande ser gratis en todo el
The average CEO at America’s biggestcompanies earns 200x more than the median worker. We'vegot to change that.
call. Registertoday:
It's time to give our teachers a raise. Youngpeople should be able to see teaching as a profession that’sboth noble and
Violence has no place in our politics. Weshould use our words and deeds to bring Americans
Hillary Clinton’s statement on her commentsabout the Reagans' record on HIV and
Confused about the Democratic primaryprocess? Our delegate strategist breaks it
Humbled to stand with these women, whohave turned unimaginable grief into a call to action we allneed to hear. -H
Climate change is too urgent a threat to waiton Congress. Proud of the US-Canada announcement to takesteps to reduce methane emissions.
Debate one of these guys? Bring it on.#GOPdebate
Fomentar la violencia contra manifestantes ymiembros de la prensa en tus eventos es una
.@realDonaldTrump: condoning violenceagainst protesters and press at your rallies is the realdisgrace.
Republican candidates deny climate changebecause they’re “not scientists.”
Ya es hora de movernos hacia el futuro—elembargo no ha funcionado por 50 años. Hillary apoya lanormalización de relaciones con
Tell us more about how sexism is wrong,@realDonaldTrump.
.@shondarhimes @tonygoldwyn@kerrywashington @violadavis @ellenpompeo: Talk about apower lineup. Thank you for being on this team!
Over four decades, Hillary has taken on hershare of tough fights. Here are a few of her biggestaccomplishments:
Here's what you need to know about the stateof the Democratic primary race, in 6
A look at the backward views on LGBT rights,women, and health care held by all of the remaining GOPcandidates:
This kind of behavior is repugnant. We set thetone for our campaigns—we should encourage respect, notviolence.
Harriet Tubman devoted her life to freeingslaves and led the first-ever US military operation designed bya woman.
.@FLGovScott, all eyes are on you. Buck thetrend: Do the right thing and protect a woman's right to makeher own health decisions.
If efforts to roll back women's rights seemrelentless, you're right: States have enacted 282 abortionrestrictions since 2010.
States like Ohio, Utah, and Florida that attackPlanned Parenthood are attacking women's health, andthey're part of a dangerous trend.
America grows when American workers’paychecks
We're all in this together. Chip in $1, let’s winthis nomination and take on Trump:
“Puerto Ricans are citizens of America. Theydeserve to be treated as citizens.” —Hillary
Found it for you: hrc.io/climate #DemDebate
It’s a lot easier to get from 90% coverage to100% than to start over. We need to build on and protect theAffordable Care Act.
If you want a comprehensive plan to helpreduce the student debt you already have ⬇️
La economía funciona si todos salen adelante—Hillary va a luchar para mejorar las oportunidades paratodos.
Said it before. Will say it again.
When someone says you're beholden to banks—but @nytimes says your Wall St. plan is tougher.hrc.io/1kIzwkM
Will repeat this as often as needed: No bankshould be too big to fail. No executive should be too big tojail.
"The money that rescued the auto industrywas in that bill. Senator Sanders voted against it.”
Stop the raids. Stop the round ups. Stop thedeporting.
"Do you regret voting against [immigrationreform] now in hindsight?" @BernieSanders: "No."hrc.io/1pymwBb
“It’s time we end family detention.” —Hillary#DemDebate
Hillary Clinton solo tiene una palabra paraDonald Trump: ¡Basta!
RT if you agree.
"You don’t make America great by getting ridof everything that made America great.” —Hillary on DonaldTrump
As Hillary takes the stage at the #DemDebatetonight, let her know you’re with her:
In America if you work hard and do your part,you should be able to get ahead—no matter who you are orwhere you started
It’s a simple idea: If you work hard, youshouldn't have to struggle and stress to make ends
Shirley was only 5 years old when mostwomen got the right to vote. Here's what's on her mind duringthis election:
Hillary dropped by @reddit to say “thank you”to some of her nicest supporters. (Yep, you read that
La brecha salarial entre hombres y mujeres esinaceptable.
Why Hillary has won nearly all the editorialboard endorsements in the Democratic primary so
Have student debt? Here are five ways Hillarywants to help.
Penalizing people who paid their student loanson time is outrageous—and illegal. We've got to fight this.hrc.io/1TJSAPi
"I want to talk about what working families areup against." Hillary’s remarks tonight after winning inMississippi.
"If we reach for love and kindness instead ofbluster and bigotry, we can see the best in each other, not theworst."
"It’s simple economics: America grows whenyour paycheck grows."
Everyone who works hard and does their partshould be able to say, “I can make it in
"If we lift each other up, instead of tearing eachother down, there’s nothing we can’t do together."
“Every child should have a good school and agreat teacher, no matter what ZIP code they’re
We need to build on what makes Americagreat–our energy and optimism, our openness and
Watch live: Hillary speaks after winning inMississippi →
Marriage equality is the law. I stand with thosefilibustering in MO to make sure discrimination won't be.
Text CONGRATS to 47246 to tell Hillary you’reproud to be on her team
Thank you,
At the @UN conference in Beijing, Hillaryissued a call to action heard around the world.#InternationalWomensDay
Today, Michigan and Mississippi head to thepolls. Here’s how we can bring home two more
Live in MI or MS? Call the hotline with anyquestions about voting today! 844-IM4-HILL
No child should live in fear of losing herparents to deportation. We will keep families
“Women’s rights are human rights.”
On repeat at @HFA HQ during#WomensHistoryMonth:
It’s Election Day for MI and MS! Confirm yourpolling place and go vote today:
Advancing the status of women and girlsmakes economies grow and nations more secure. It's theright—and smart—thing to do. #IWD2016
In March 1933, First Lady Eleanor Rooseveltheld the first women-only press conference at the WhiteHouse.
A key difference between the two candidatesat the #DemDebate last night:
"Her first instinct is always...to ask, 'What can Ido to make it better?'"
For everyone who already has student debt,Hillary has a plan to help you, too: hrc.io/college#DemTownHall
Every American should have access to highereducation without having to go into debt.
We have to reform the criminal justice system.We also have to expand access to education, health care,jobs, and fair housing.
Roe v. Wade and the Constitution guaranteewomen the right to safe, legal abortion. Politicians have noright to restrict it.
"It's not much of a right if it is totally limitedand constrained." —Hillary on women's right to safe and legalabortion
Last quarter we raised $18 million forDemocrats across the country. Progress must happen at alllevels of government.
A vote in 2002 is not a strategy to defeat ISISnow.
When it was time to fund the rescue of ourauto industry, only one Democratic candidate voted
Workers are our economy's greatest strength—not costs to be cut. They shouldn't sacrifice whileexecutives skate by.
Myrlie, you're right. There's still work to do inthe struggle for equality &amp; justice. Grateful for yoursupport. hrc.io/1Sun6v3
Fifty years later, we have to recognize that thiswork isn't done. We have to make it easier for every citizen tovote—not harder.
Bloody Sunday, March 7, 1965, was a day ofhorror and pain. But it was also a day of resilience and grace.#Selma51
Necesitamos una presidenta que puedadefendernos de las propuestas de los
Anyone who wants to be president of thiscountry should have a real plan to raise incomes, create jobs,and improve our
Negligent gun manufacturers should be heldaccountable when they endanger our
We've got to keep talking about Flint, andtalking about real plans to make sure this never happensagain. Our kids deserve nothing
It's wrong that a community like Flint wouldsee its health put at risk to save a buck—it's also not acoincidence.
Imagine the outrage if this happened towealthy white kids instead of poor black kids.
It's not enough to talk only about economics.We have to tackle racial, economic, &amp;
Gov. Snyder should resign or be recalled, butwe also need to focus on how to help Flint now.
Justice for Flint requires that we address racial,economic, and environmental injustice.
When we talk about the Flint water crisis, wealso have to talk about its root causes—economic, racial, andother.
Flint's water crisis is an example of thecombined effects of intersecting issues that impactcommunities of
When we talk about the outrage happening inFlint, it's important to talk about who lives there.
For #DemDebate response, follow@TheBriefing2016.
Tonight's #DemDebate is in Flint, Michigan—aonce-prosperous manufacturing town hit hard by a decline injobs.
With the spotlight on Flint for the #DemDebate,we're interrupting our regularly scheduled debate coverage todig deeper into that
Let’s not forget that there are lots of Flints outthere. Places where poor people and people of color havebeen left out and left
Un momento especial durante una reunión conla Unión de Campesinos. Vea el
Nancy's strength of character was legendary,and her advocacy—especially for Alzheimer's research—wastireless. Praying for her family.
A young girl asked: "What are you going to doabout all this bullying?"
We can’t accept 33,000 gun deaths per yearas “normal.” Most Americans—including law-abiding gunowners—believe we can do
Maine, it’s Caucus Day! Live in the Pine TreeState? Confirm your caucus location here:
No one should have to fear discriminationbecause of who they are or who they
Diversity is a strength, not a weakness. If welift each other up, we can make this country even
Together, we can win the nomination and keepworking to break every barrier holding Americans back. Chipin $1 now:
This country belongs to all of us—not just tothose at the top. Not just to people who look one way,worship one way, or even think one
"I am thrilled we’re adding to our pledgeddelegate count. I’m grateful to everyone who turned out tosupport us." —Hillary in
Thank you,
Watch live: Hillary speaks at the@MichiganDems reception in Detroit →
We're ahead by 199 pledged delegates. Here’swhy that matters:
A message to corporate America: If you cheatworkers, customers, or taxpayers, we'll hold you
"There is a co-worker I have who is male...Irecently found out he was getting paid more than me. I wasshocked.”
Kansas, Louisiana and Nebraska: Call thehotline with any questions about voting today! 844-IM4-HILL(844-464-4455)
We should be supporting LGBT kids—nottrying to change them. It’s time to end conversion therapy forminors.
Flint families have waited long enough for thehelp they need. No more excuses—the Senate should passthe bipartisan aid bill before it.
It's time to stand up to pharmaceuticalcompanies hiking the price of drugs for profit.
It’s Election Day for KS, LA, and NE! Confirmyour polling place here and vote today:
Let's put the dream of starting and running athriving small business within reach of every
On this day in 1917, Jeannette Rankin took herseat in Congress, becoming our country’s first womanrepresentative.
Creating good-paying jobs has to be a toppriority for the next president. We’ve got to build on theprogress we’ve made under
"As we lay the foundation for a brighter future,we have to deal with the legacy of the past: barriers that holdback communities of
More money in the hands of wealthy peoplemostly just helps wealthy people—but more money in thehands of working people helps
Companies have to start treating workers likeassets to be invested in, not costs to be
"If you cheat your employees, exploit yourcustomers, pollute our environment, or rip off taxpayers, wewill hold you accountable."
Corporations have to do right by theircommunities and our country. Too many aren’t holding uptheir end of the
"Michigan proves every day that Americanworkers are the best in the world—all they need is a fairchance on a fair playing field."
"As Detroit proves every day, what has beenbroken can be re-built, stronger than before." —Hillary
"The biggest insult of all was to the Americanpeople. The economy was basically an afterthought." —Hillaryon the #GOPdebate in
Watch live → Hillary speaks about creatingjobs, strengthening the economy, and revitalizing cities inDetroit:
We have to do more to raise wages &amp;support paid leave for hardworking families. I stand with@Raise_Up_WA in their work to do just that.
We need to make it a national mission tocreate millions of jobs in clean energy, manufacturing,
On this day in 1933, Frances Perkins becamethe first woman cabinet member as Sec. of
How many more of these do we have to sitthrough? Asking for a friend.
Marriage equality is the law of the land. Dealwith it.
It's not "politicizing" to say that what'shappening with the poisoned water in Flint is an emergencyand a moral outrage.
Mientras los candidatos republicanos seinsultan entre ellos, Hillary lucha para que todos puedan saliradelante.
The more time that passes, the scarier thisgets. ⬇️
True on foreign policy—and literally everythingelse. #GOPdebate
The #GOPdebate is offering a stark picture ofone vision for America. Here's
Instead of shouting about what's wrong withAmerica, let's make it work for everyone.
Ninguna persona que trabaje a tiempocompleto debería criar a sus hijos en la
No one should have to choose between theirfamily or a pay check. Thank you @JimmyGomezCA forleading to expand
We can't let the next president undoeverything @POTUS has made
Kids come before corporations. Companiesshouldn't get special loopholes that endanger families.
Happy #WomensHistoryMonth! We'recelebrating Dr. Mae Jemison, the first African Americanwoman to travel in
We won't let families be torn apart. Proud tohave @UFWupdates on this team—sí se
We’ve got to build on the Affordable Care Actand make sure that every single American has access toquality, affordable health
We won eight contests last night. We have themomentum—but this primary is far from over. Chip in to keepgoing:
We had a big night on Super Tuesday. Now,we have to keep fighting even harder. When we standtogether, there's nothing we can't
We've got to keep going, keep working, keepbreaking down those barriers and imagine what we can buildtogether.
America has never stopped being great. Ourtask is to make America whole.
A typical African-American family has 8 centsof wealth for every dollar a white family has. We need to fixthat. hrc.io/1QsiYqO
We need to make it easier for parents tobalance work and family.
No parent should have to choose betweengetting a paycheck and caring for their sick
We need to break down barriers and buildladders of opportunity, so every person can live up to his orher
It might be unusual for a presidential candidateto say that we need more love and kindness in America—butwe do.
Back at you, Massachusetts.
"We're going to break down barriers and buildladders of opportunity and empowerment." More fromtonight's remarks:
Text ImWithHer to 47246 to tell Hillary you'reby her side all the way to the White
America never stopped being great. Ourmission is to make America
RT if you’re ready to make
Let’s go win this nomination. If you’re standingwith Hillary tonight, chip in $1 right now.
Thank you, Texas!
If we resist the forces trying to drive us apart,we can come together to make this country work
"It’s clear that the stakes in this election havenever been higher. And the rhetoric we’re hearing on the otherside has never been
"We know we’ve got work to do. It's not tomake America great again—America never stopped beinggreat. We have to make America
This country belongs to all of us—not just tothose at the top. Not just to people who look one way,worship one way, or even think one
"I congratulate Senator Sanders on his strongshowing tonight, and I am so grateful to all of you who votedfor me."
To every member of this team: Thank you.When it's gotten tough, you've never wavered. Now, let'skeep going. -H
A win especially close to Hillary’s
Let the world know that you’re prouder thanever to stand with Hillary. Get your free magnet now →hrc.io/1VP06G1
High five: We just won Alabama andTennessee.
This is one of the biggest days of the entirecampaign. Chip in $1 right now, and let’s win this primarytogether.
The first #SuperTuesday results are in: We wonGeorgia and
Waiting in line to vote? Stay put—Hillary’scounting on you! RT to tell a
It's #SuperTuesday! Hillary needs your help toensure wins across the country. Will you make some
If you want a president who'll wake up everyday thinking about how to make your life better, she's yourcandidate.
Is your state voting on #SuperTuesday? Callthe hotline with any questions: 844-IM4-HILL
It’s #SuperTuesday and thousands areheading to the polls. RT to let them know why you're with
If you live in AL, AR, CO, GA, MA, MN, OK, TN,TX, VA, or VT, confirm your polling place:
Help Hillary secure another big win by makingsure your friends in Super Tuesday states know what's atstake.
Today on @LinkedIn: We need to solveAmerica's student debt crisis.
A father to Hillary: “I need you to win for mydaughters.”
To those running our country's corporations: Ifyou cheat employees, exploit consumers, or rip off taxpayers,we’re going to make you
Hillary shared a few words to live by afterwinning the South Carolina
Time is running out to tell Hillary you're withher before Super Tuesday! Commit now:
These mothers are reclaiming the narrativearound their children’s deaths.
Why has Hillary received the endorsements ofso many papers that backed @POTUS? She gets things
Even presidential candidates get starstruckwhen meeting their heroes.
We need to make it a national mission tocreate millions of jobs in clean energy, manufacturing,
Too much talent is being kept on the sidelines.In every industry, we can do and need to do
America never stopped being great. Whenwe're all in this together, there’s no barrier that can hold usback.
Saying hello to the overflow room in
in Detroit!#MIForHillary #ImWithHer
After becoming the first woman to win the SCprimary, Hillary spoke to a packed house. Here's what shehad to say:
Thanks to CHIP, eight million kids like Connarare living the future they deserve.
It’s not enough to make college moreaffordable. We need to help people with the student debt theyalready have.
We need more love and kindness in America.Our best years can be ahead of us if we stand with eachother.
“When we stand together, there is no barriertoo big to break.” What Hillary said after winning in SouthCarolina:
usedtonight isn't just a line. Read this @rubycramer
It may seem odd to hear someone running forpresident say we need more love and kindness in America—but we do.
If you’re proud to stand with Hillary all the wayto the White House, chip in $1 to help her get
"Our country was built by people who hadeach other’s backs. Who understood that, at our best, we allrise together." —Hillary in
"Instead of building walls, we need to betearing down barriers. We need to show that we really are allin this together." —Hillary in
"We don’t need to make America great again.America never stopped being great. But we do need to makeAmerica whole again." —Hillary in
"Tomorrow, this campaign goes national."—Hillary in
"Today you sent a message: In America, whenwe stand together, there is no barrier too big to break."—Hillary in South
RT if you're standing with her all the way to theWhite House.
Heading into Super Tuesday with a smile. TextCONGRATS to 47246 to tell Hillary you’re proud to be on herteam.
We did it, South
If you’re with Hillary, chip in $1 right now, andlet’s go win this nomination.
To South Carolina, to the volunteers at theheart of our campaign, to the supporters who power it: thankyou. -H
Lots of love in South
Just a few hours left to vote in the SC primary!Hillary is counting on you. Confirm your polling place and govote:
Couldn't ask for a better right-hand woman onthe trail. Happy birthday, @chelseaclinton—I'm so proud ofyou. -H
Hillary spoke with students at @MorrisColl1908about student debt and HBCUs:
Today, thousands of South Carolinians willcast their votes for Hillary! Join them and say
Do all the good you can, for all the people youcan, for as long as you can.
Know someone in South Carolina who’s notsure who to vote for today? Share
in Columbia onprimary eve.
Today’s the day! As South Carolina heads tothe polls, let Hillary know you're with her.
supporter, and whywe really need her to win
.@BillClinton's closing argument for Hillary:"We need a changemaker, not a change
It’s election day, South Carolina! TextCOMMIT2SC to 47246 to find your polling location. Hillary’scounting on
Sometimes running for president involvescrashing a bachelor
Hillary no le aumentará los impuestos a laclase media. Cuando la clase media es fuerte, el país
.@marcorubio standing up for banks instead ofhardworking citizens is wrong. It's time to put Puerto Ricansfirst.
It's outrageous that students are being askedto pay interest rates higher than you would pay to buy ahouse.
Obamacare saved this woman when sheneeded emergency surgery. Let's build on its progress, notstart over.
Living without discrimination should be a rightfor all, not a privilege for some. Hear hear,
What’s at stake in this election is whether ornot we’re going to help every kid reach their
"She cares. She tries. She perseveres."@jonfavs on supporting Hillary in 2016:
shows up at yourbachelor party? You take some photos.
Talking sexism in the workplace, racial justice,and...perspiration with @Buzzfeed’s
Let's not divide ourselves between “us” and“them.” America works better when we all do our part. We’rein this
It's been less than a week since a massshooting tore apart a community, and now another. This hasto end. Praying for Hesston, KS.
This is it: Your last chance to say you're withHillary before the South Carolina primary! Commit
No matter which Republican is nominated, wecan’t afford to let him in the White House. Add your name ifyou agree.
We live in a world with serious foreign policychallenges. We need serious leadership.
We can't let Republicans rip away @POTUS’progress. Text ImWithHer to 47246 if you
What will strengthen our economy: raisingmiddle-class incomes. What won't: more tax cuts formillionaires.
Affordable health care should be a human rightin America, not a privilege. We will not let Republicans repealthe ACA.
Planned Parenthood provides critical healthcare to millions of Americans. Republicans vow they'll defundit. Not on our watch.
.@POTUS is doing his job to fill the vacancy onthe Supreme Court. @marcorubio, @tedcruz, and GOPsenators should do theirs.
We need comprehensive immigration reform tokeep families like Karla's together.
Como presidenta, Hillary protegerá, renovará,y expandirá DACA y DAPA, las órdenes ejecutivas. No creeen separar a las familias.
We will not rip families apart. We will defend@POTUS's actions on immigration and go further to keepfamilies together.
We should build a path to citizenship, not awall on the border.
Let's break down barriers—not build newwalls.
We are not going to deport 12 million people.Demonizing immigrants is beneath our values.
The #GOPdebate candidates all holdbackward views on LGBT rights, women, and health
America never stopped being great. We justneed to make it work for everyone.
"Plugged into the establishment matrix?" "Thatsounds painful." Mean Tweets with
@transforhillary honored to have your support.Together we'll take a stand for safety, respect, and fullequality for trans
"I had to turn my sorrow into a strategy—mymourning into a movement."
“We endorsed her because she endorsed
Mean Tweets: campaign edition with Senator@AlFranken.
It isn’t right that we have kids trying to learn incrumbling classrooms. We need to invest in
Recognizing privilege and dismantlingsystemic racism is on all of us.
"I'm most concerned about the kids who areleft out and left behind."
We will never let Republicans privatize SocialSecurity. We will protect it and expand it.
People who are working hard should get therespect, dignity, and income they deserve. Middle-classfamilies need a raise.
We need to make college affordable. We alsoneed to lift the enormous burden of student debt that millionscarry right now.
Systemic racism is found in our criminal justicesystem, housing, education—but it's also cultural. We have tocombat it all.
There is one candidate, in either party, who'sprepared to keep us safe as commander in chief. She's onstage at the #DemTownHall right
A chilling explainer from @voxdotcom on thestate of gun violence in
South Carolina#BreakingBarriers #ImWithHer
“If there’s another child out there that can besaved, I will do this for the rest of my life.” -Gwen
If this team wins the White House, Virginia isinvited to come by and dance any time.
Just a reminder.
Racial inequality isn’t just a symptom ofeconomic
It’s time to close this dangerous loophole inour gun laws.
Wall Street can never be allowed to wreckMain Street again. No bank can be too big to fail and noexecutive can be too powerful to
El país necesita un líder que mantenga anuestras familias
We shouldn't force families to choose betweenbreaking apart or living in fear.
Hillary and Dr. Glenda Glover of @TSUedu:HBCUs are fundamental to the basic bargain of
In Ohio and across the country, Republicansare once again attacking women's health. We won't stand forthis.
“She is the 'what can I do?' candidate.”@BillClinton on Hillary’s commitment to helping communitiesleft behind.
Gun manufacturers should be heldaccountable when they endanger Americans. Add your nameif you agree:
.@clairecmc If ever cancer picked the wrongperson to mess with, it's you. Stay strong and take care ofyourself. I'm in your corner.
How one law gives gun makers immunity fromaccountability and could derail justice for Sandy Hookfamilies.
Hillary’s doing a Facebook Q&amp;A with@theGrio this afternoon! Join the conversation and leave yourquestions here:
It's 2016. A woman's place is...wherever shewants it to be.
We need to protect and build on @POTUS'progress.
What’s at stake in this election is whether ornot we’re going to help every kid reach their
is answering your questionslive this afternoon on our FB page:
If we face the reality of systemic racism, wecan begin to reform our broken criminal justice &amp;immigration systems.
Torture doesn't work. It's wrong. Thesedangerous words from Republicans have no place in ourcountry. hrc.io/1Q0xTIl
Behind the scenes *right* after our win inNevada.
Together, this is the kind of world we can buildfor the next generations.
@AntonioFrench @HillaryClinton @MO4HillaryLove
“Some may have doubted us, but we neverdoubted each other. This one’s for you.”
What did Hillary do right after winning Nevada?Headed to Texas to defend voting rights.
Our hearts are in Kalamazoo today. We mustend this epidemic. Communities across the country arepaying the cost for inaction.
Flint wasn't just treated with indifference, itwas treated with neglect, and that isn't
Our schools should lead students towardsopportunity, not
Have student debt? Here's a real plan to helpyou right now, explained by @MichelleWKwan and@Vivek_Vis.
for BLACK VOTES MATTER: A @BET NEWSSPECIAL
In 2015, @Simone_Biles leapt into recordbooks as the world's most decorated woman gymnast.hrc.io/1KZFp9u
This is a campaign to break down every barrierthat holds us back. If we work together, anything is
Some may have doubted us, but we neverdoubted each other.
“I’ve never believed in dividing Americabetween ‘us’ and ‘them.’ We are all in this together. We allhave to do our part.”
No one can get this done alone—not even thePresident of the United States. It’s got to be the mission ofour entire
The truth is, we aren’t a single-issue country.We need more than a plan for the big banks. The middle classneeds a
Americans are right to be angry. But we’re alsohungry for real
This is your campaign. It is a campaign tobreak down every barrier that holds you
“To all my supporters out there—some mayhave doubted us, but we never doubted each other. Thisone’s for you.” —Hillary in
Nevada: . Watch Hillary's victory speech livefrom Las Vegas:
Send a message to Hillary and tell her you’vegot her back all the way to the White House.
Text CONGRATS to 47246 to tell Hillary you’reproud to be on her team
Together, we can win the nomination and keepworking to break every barrier holding Americans back. Chipin now:
The feeling is mutual,
To everyone who turned out in every corner ofNevada with determination and heart: This is your win. Thankyou.
No podemos permitir que un republicano ganelas
Nevada: If you’re in line and have a question orneed help at your caucus location, call
Nevada: If you're in line, stay there—and talkto your neighbors about
Stay in line, Nevada! You can still caucus ifyou’re in line.
This is what we're fighting for in
Nevada: Doors don’t close until noon. Findyour caucus location here:
Let’s do this,
In a few hours, Nevadans will head out tocaucus. RT if you're standing with
Hillary está luchando por Karla y millones defamilias que no deben vivir con miedo.
Caucus day is here, Nevada! Text NVCOMMITto 47246 to find your caucus location, and get there by 11a.m. Hillary's counting on
Will Ferrell has a message for you, Nevada:Caucus for Hillary today at 11AM. Your location:hillaryclinton.com/nevada
Hillary quiere arreglar nuestro sistemamigratorio. Luchará para mantener a las familias
The Nevada caucus is TODAY! Now is the timeto stand with Hillary. Join the team:
Ningún niño debe de tener miedo de estarseparada de sus padres. Necesitamos mantener a las familiasunidas.
Proud to stand w/ @KrisGoldsmith85: Our vetssuffering from PTS deserve action and a fair hearing.#fairness4vets hrc.io/1UcxvM9
Do all the good you can, for all the people youcan, for as long as you can.
Kids being sent into the criminal justice systeminstead of school is a civil rights issue, and it needs to
Too many kids are being criminalized insteadof educated. Here's how we will end the school-to-prisonpipeline:
.@POTUS' achievements speak forthemselves. The idea that supporting him is a ploy to winblack votes is
So proud to have Congressman Jim Clyburnon this team.
“We feel very blessed with opportunity—likewe’ve reached our American dream. That started with animmigrant story.”
Last summer, Sandra Bland lost her life inpolice custody. Now, her mother is channeling her grief intoaction.
Millions of families like Karla’s live in fear ofdeportation. We need a president who will fight to protectthem.
This week, Hillary spoke about breaking downbarriers for African Americans. Here's how she did it in NewYork:
Unfathomable that Flint residents were forcedto pay almost $1,000/year for poisoned water.
#ImWithHer #Hillary2016
"She has been truly loyal to President Obamaand is the best person to protect &amp; build on his legacy."—Bill Murphy
Text MADE to 47246 to be the first to knowwhen new items are added to the #MadeForHistory
Excited to launch #MadeForHistory, featuringtees by Marc Jacobs, Tory Burch, and more of your favoritedesigners!
No child should have to live in fear of losingher parents. We need to support DREAMers and keep familiestogether.
We need to face up to the reality of systemicracism and then work to dismantle
✔️ Lifesaving cancer screenings ✔️ Birth control✔️ Sex education Pretty wonderful.
We honor Sandra Bland's memory by acting toreform policing practices. Proud to have her mom Geneva onthis team.
Many of the major newspapers that backed@POTUS in 2008 are supporting Hillary now. Here's
President Trump? Cruz? Rubio? Carson?hrc.io/1PH46Xi #GOPTownHall
Thankful for @Pontifex's visit to the border andcall for immigration reform. We need to keep familiestogether, not break them
Voting rights, marriage equality, campaignfinance—all are at stake in the nomination of our nextSCOTUS justice.
Hillary quiere reformar nuestro sistemamigratorio para mantener fuerte la unión
The inequities that persist in our justice systemundermine our shared vision of what America can and shouldbe.
"I want to know that the candidate I'm votingfor acknowledges our struggles."
To raise incomes, we need to support unionsand a living wage. I stand with working Minnesotans today.hrc.io/1KWTZ1z
is grateful 4 the support of Geneva.Blessings 2 all of our mothers who stand with us#SandraBland
Behind the vote totals and the delegate countsare the voters themselves. Their stories:
"She was making points about privilege thatminorities always make, but it packed such a differentpunch." -@rembert
Anyone asking for your vote has to grapplewith the reality of inequality in America—and offer real plansto fix it.
No American should work 40 hours/week andstill struggle to make ends meet—not in Alabama and notanywhere else. hrc.io/217av3a
These are not only issues of economicinequality—they are also issues of racial
Something’s wrong when the median wealthfor black families is a tiny fraction of what it is for whitefamilies.
is gettingintersectional. t.co/dEfDBHA99q
Los líderes deben estar listos para cualquiercosa. Hillary tiene la experiencia y es la candidata
We need real plans to combat systemic racismand remove the barriers holding African Americans back.Hillary's plan:
"When we come together—all of us—with asense of shared purpose and shared humanity, we can solveany problem and heal any divide."
"We need to recognize our privilege andpractice humility, rather than assume that our experiences areeveryone’s experiences."
"White Americans need to do a better job oflistening when African Americans talk about the seen &amp;unseen barriers that you face every
"Ending systemic racism requires contributionsfrom all of us—especially those of us who haven’texperienced it ourselves."
"Let's roll up our sleeves and get to workdismantling the school-to-prison pipeline...We need a cradle-to-college pipeline."
"We need to fix the crisis of massincarceration...and end the epidemic of African Americansbeing killed by police or dying in
"We need end-to-end reform in our criminaljustice system—not half-measures, but a full commitmentwith real follow-through."
"I’ll be the first to admit...I’ve made my ownmistakes; I've walked my own journey. But I believe with allmy heart that we can do
Anyone asking for your vote has aresponsibility to grapple with reality—to see things as theyactually are, not just as we want them to
"These are not only problems of economicinequality. They are problems of racial inequality. We’ve got tosay that loudly and
"These inequities are wrong, but they’re alsoimmoral. ... We have to begin by facing up to the reality ofsystemic racism."
"Something’s wrong when black kids getarrested for petty crimes but white CEOs get away withfleecing our entire country."
"We face a complex set of economic, social,and political challenges. They’re intersectional, reinforcing,&amp; we’ve got to take them all
It’s not a coincidence that the Flint water crisiswas allowed to happen in a largely black, largely
"I want to talk about how we break downbarriers that disproportionately affect African Americans,&amp; build ladders of opportunity."
Watch live—Hillary speaks about how we cancombat systemic racism and break down barriers for blackfamilies:
We need a president who will tackle all theissues we face, from systemic racism to LGBT
Hillary, @katyperry, @eltonofficial,@andradaymusic—all in one place? Get your tickets for the#ImWithHer concert!
We can't just talk about combating inequality.We need real plans to lift up communities that are being heldback.
We will invest $125 billion to help communitiesfacing economic and racial barriers. Here’s what the planwould do:
Young black Americans face unemployment atalmost 2x the average rate. We need to fix that.hrc.io/1Tjp0ON
We need Wall Street and campaign financereform, but that's not enough. We need to break downbarriers that hold back communities of
Everyone has his or her own journey to theballot box. Here are stories behind the votes.
.@POTUS is doing his job by nominating a newSupreme Court justice. Tell Senate Republicans to do
It's @POTUS' job to nominate Supreme Courtjustices, and the Senate has a responsibility to
11 So, a message for Senate Republicans: Fillthis vacancy. @POTUS will do his job. Do yours.
10 As for complaints that this is an electionyear: 1988 was an election year, too—and Justice Kennedywas confirmed 97-0.
9 There are 339 days until the next presidenttakes office. The Senate has never taken more than 125 daysto vote on a SCOTUS nominee.
8 I have news for Republicans who would putpolitics over the Constitution: Refusing to do your duty isn’trighteous, it's disgraceful.
7 With these critical cases in the balance,Republicans wasted no time in vowing to block any SCOTUSnomination from @POTUS. A new low.
6 These decisions could determine whether weas a nation uphold our principles of liberty and equality, orturn back the clock.
5 And right now, a case from Texas coulddetermine whether the right to abortion will be a reality for allor some.
4 Right now, the fundamental principle of "oneperson, one vote” is at stake in a case before the SupremeCourt.
3 Right now, millions of families are waiting forSCOTUS to decide on @POTUS' executive actions onimmigration.
2 The need to fill the Supreme Court vacancyis not an occasion for politics as usual. This has real andurgent stakes for Americans now.
1 Until Jan. 20, 2017, it's @POTUS' job tonominate Supreme Court justices—it's right there in theConstitution. -H
Can we get back to politics, please? (Greatjob, @HamiltonMusical.)
Striking a pose with students from theExpertise Cosmetology Institute in Las Vegas,
Couldn't agree more, @IAmSteveHarvey: It'stime to act on gun violence. Thank you for telling these storiestoday.
If we claim we are for families, then we have tofix our immigration system. We can’t wait any longer for apath to full, equal
Today, Planned Parenthood re-opens inColorado Springs—a testament to hope in the face of hostilityand violence. hrc.io/20WlYG2
We need action now in Flint. Please give if youare able: flintkids.org
A day on the campaign trail with @MsVivicaFoxand @ImAngelaBassett.
"It’s hard to describe in words what parentsand kids are going through in Flint."
The ability to exercise your reproductive rightsshould be a reality for all, not just those who can afford
is fighting for the heart and soul ofthis country and I'm knocking doors to help her
Black families are denied mortgages nearly 3xas often as white families. We need to tear down barriers ofsystemic racism that still
The children of Flint deserve bright futures—and today, those children need our help. Please chip in ifyou're able:
Obamacare has brought millions of Americanshealth care they need. They can't wait for promises that can'tbe kept.
In 1963, Vivian Malone Jones defied Gov.Wallace's segregation orders and became @UofAlabama'sfirst black
National political director @AmandaRenteriawent with Hillary to Flint, Michigan. Here's what she
Obama is president until Jan. 20, 2017. It's hisjob to nominate a justice, the Senate has a responsibility tovote.
Happy Valentine’s
Our country can't live up to its potential unlesswe give every American a chance to live up to
Takeaway from #GOPdebate: We can't let oneof these guys rip away the progress we've made. Sign on ifyou agree:
If anyone needed a reminder of how importantit is to elect a Democratic president, look at the SupremeCourt.
Demonizing immigrants, dangerous foreignpolicy proposals, and nonstop bickering—no need to live-tweet #GOPdebate. We've seen
Necesitamos una presidenta que puedadefendernos de las propuestas de los
"All of us Democrats have a responsibility tomake sure a Republican doesn’t win and rip away all theprogress we've made." —Hillary in
"Elections have consequences. The presidenthas a responsibility to nominate a new justice and the Senatehas a responsibility to
"Barack Obama is President of the UnitedStates until January 20, 2017—that is a fact, whether theRepublicans like it or not."
 @dallasnews  @TB_Times  @mySA Whya few of the largest newspapers in Florida and Texas justendorsed Hillary:
HBCUs provide more than a quality education—they increase opportunity. Supporting them is
This is a fight for everyone who's ever beenknocked down—but refused to be knocked
A socialist feminist on why she'll vote forHillary:
We don't live in a single-issue country. Weneed to tackle all the barriers holding Americans
call is MONDAY, and Hillary herself will bespeaking! Join us:
HBCUs produce some of our finest leaders.Hillary's plan dedicates $25 billion to support institutions likethese.
inthe March 1 Texas primary. t.co/P8AJGcrGxK
Excited to announce the #ImWithHer concertat Radio City with @katyperry, @eltonofficial, &amp;@AndraDayMusic! Join us:
.@POTUS doesn't get the credit he deserves.Some can criticize his leadership; we'll build on his
We need to do more to support smallbusinesses—particularly minority- and women-ownedbusinesses—so they can get financing and
If we solved our problems with Wall Streettomorrow, we'd still have discrimination holding too manyAmericans back.
A Bernie Sanders supporter asked Hillary aquestion—here’s what he thought of her
In case you missed it last night
Feb. 12 at 12 noon ET. Register to join the
showed tonight that she’s the bestcandidate to take on all of the challenges we face &amp;make good things happen.
"I am not a single-issue candidate and I do notbelieve we live in a single-issue country."
Next January, our next president will be swornin. Add your name if you think it should be Hillary:hrc.io/2408AQa
If you think Hillary is the best person to bepresident, chip in $1: hrc.io/1ovNIQs
RT if you agree.
President Obama doesn't get the credit hedeserves. His accomplishments shouldn't be up for debate ata
Yeah, @BernieSanders—she's got a *bit* ofexperience. hrc.io/20rNoOE
A vote in 2002 is not a plan to defeat ISIS in2016.
There are two candidates on stage at the#DemDebate. Only one is ready to be commander in
We need to knock down the barriers of racism,sexism, and discrimination holding Americans back.#DemDebate
It's not enough to only crack down on bigbanks. We need to go further and tackle other dangerousrisks. #DemDebate
"I’m very proud that we have more than750,000 donors, the vast majority giving small contributions."Join them →
"We are not going to deport 11 or 12 millionpeople in this country."
When we talk about criminal justice reform, wealso have to talk about jobs, education, and housing.#DemDebate
We need a leader on women's health—not justsomebody who votes right, but somebody who leads theeffort. #DemDebate
"I think we still have some barriers to knockdown—that's why this has been at the core of my campaign."#DemDebate
"You know, before it was called Obamacare, itwas called Hillarycare."
Cheering her ⬇️ on at tonight’s #DemDebate?RT this to let her know.
5 times Hillary Clinton nailed it on the#DemDebate stage—and what to expect from her
We should insist that ending gun violence is apriority in this election.
@AditiRao83 Thank you, Aditi—for all of yourhard work in Iowa, and for
When this woman had to have emergencysurgery, Obamacare saved her
Absolutely right: We should provide counsel forchildren seeking asylum. Thanks, @SenatorReid.hrc.io/1PPCFvC
From fixing the criminal justice system tocreating jobs, "Clinton's ambitions match our own." -@GKButterfield
"More than anyone else in America today, sheis prepared to be president...day one."
"The most qualified candidate, and someonewho is, by all reality-based measures,
Let's dispel with this fiction that @POTUSdoesn't know what he's doing. He knows exactly what he'sdoing.
Asking Tamir's family to pay for his ambulanceis heartless. Cleveland should drop this fee. hrc.io/1RtmTrF
In 2014, Public Advocate @TishJames becamethe first woman of color to hold citywide office in New YorkCity.
HBCUs graduate the majority of AfricanAmerican teachers in our country. We should support andreward HBCUs and the vital role they
canDO. Dropping my mike now.
We're going to fight for real solutions thatmake a real difference in people's
The next president could transform SCOTUSfor decades. Whether we fight climate change or sit by is atstake. hrc.io/1o02X3y
It’s not whether you get knocked down thatmatters, it’s whether you get back
Glowing with pride in Columbia, SouthCarolina.
Text FIGHTER to 47246 to tell Hillary you'restanding with her
has a college plan thatwould dedicate $25 billion to HBCUs. That’s just one reason#ImWithHer.
Fighting to improve the lives of kids andfamilies—and never giving up.
is my choice forpresident. #ImWithHer #Blessed
You’re the reason we’re going to win thisnomination and then win this election together.
This is only the beginning. We fought hard forevery vote—now we take this campaign to the entire
If you’re standing with Hillary tonight, let herknow.
Tell the world you’re proud to stand withHillary. Get your free magnet now →
If you're with Hillary, now is the time to standup and say so. If you can, pitch in to show her you’re with
To everyone who supports this campaign:Thank you. You’re the reason we’re here.
Add your name if you're with Hillary and readyto fight twice as hard.
“You’re the reason we’re here. You’re thereason we’re going to win this nomination and then win thiselection.” —Hillary in
“I know that doesn’t fit with the narrative—there are those who want to deny the passion and purposeyou show every day for this
“More than 700,000 people have contributedto this campaign, the vast majority giving less than $100.”—Hillary in
"It’s not whether you get knocked down thatmatters, it’s whether you get back up." —Hillary in
"When people anywhere in America are heldback by injustice, that demands action." —Hillary in
"A president has to make sure nothing holdsyou back—not debt, not discrimination, not a deck that’salways stacked for those at the
"People are angry. And they have every right tobe. But I know they’re also hungry. They’re hungry forsolutions."
"We’re going to fight for every vote in everystate. We’re going to fight for real solutions that make a realdifference in people’s
To @BernieSanders, congratulations. To NewHampshire, thank you. And to our volunteers: I’m so gratefulfor what you built. Now, onward.
in the #fitnprimary today! #603forHRC
is the ONLYONE who will protect the progress @BarackObama has
Not much time left to vote in the NH primary!Hillary needs you: Confirm your polling place here, then headover.
The New Hampshire cold won’t stop us! Sayyou’re with her:
“She’s the single best changemaker I’ve evermet." Watch @billclinton’s closing argument for
Say
.@ppact's @CecileRichards: There’s onecandidate who stands above the rest on women’s
Granite Staters: Show off your voting pridewith an #IVoted selfie, &amp; tag it with #ImWithHer!
Taking a break from knocking on doors to hearwhat's keeping one family up at night—and see how she canhelp.
Checking in to say hi to Hillary on primary dayin New Hampshire.
Hillary and @BernieSanders share a lot of bigprogressive goals—but they differ in how they plan to achievethem.
Scenes from the homestretch in the GraniteState.
"She's never stopped fighting for children." 4people explain why they canvass for Hillary:
with thesupport of @RepGutierrez and my fellow DREAMers@BlancaSprkls @RLopezNV
“When I vote, it is about my family. And when Ivote in this election, it’s absolutely about my
"I will get up every day and do everything I canto make a real difference for you, your families, and ourcountry." —Hillary in
"It's not enough for a president to stop badthings from happening...I think it's important to try to startgood things." —Hillary in
Tomorrow, New Hampshire voters head to thepolls! Watch Hillary's last rally before the #FITN primary
GOTV event inHudson #nhpolitics
Want to know a secret? The best way to getsomeone to vote is to ask. NH votes tomorrow—help#GOTVforHRC!
supporters whotrekked out in the snow to cheer her on. DEDICATION.#603forHRC
America's opportunity gap is not just abouteconomic inequality. It is also about racial inequality, and weneed to tackle both
Yesterday, Hillary went to Flint to hear directlyfrom a community whose concerns have too often beenignored.
"I am here because for nearly two years, Flint'swater was poisoned."
Tomorrow's the NH primary, and Hillary needsyou. Find your NH friends on Facebook and let them knowwhy #ImWithHer!
This campaign is about building the kind offuture we want the next generations to come
.@billclinton is taking over Hillary’s Instagramtoday from NH! First stop,
Pancakes, coffee, and laughs in Manchester,New Hampshire.
Sending warmest wishes to everyonecelebrating the Lunar New Year! May you have peace andprosperity in the year ahead.
This is it: Your last chance to say you're withHillary before the New Hampshire primary! Commit
Time to #GOTVforHRC! Call 3 Hillarysupporters in NH and remind them to vote on Tuesday. Youdon't even need a !
“You deserve justice, and you deserve equalityunder the law.”
What’s it like to watch football with@billclinton? Hillary explains.
doesn't say who do u want me 2blame. She says what do u want me 2 do? #ImWithHer #GOTVforHRC
"The children of Flint are just as precious asthe children of any other part of America." —Hillary in Flinttoday
“Do not grow weary doing good. Do not getdiscouraged. Do not give up.” —Hillary in
"This is not merely unacceptable or wrong,though it is both. What happened in Flint is
meeting with Mayor Weaver and #Flintresidents. #ImWithHer
"Clean water is not optional. It is not a luxury."—Hillary in Flint, MI. Watch live:
Civil rights activist Fannie Lou Hamerdedicated her life to securing voting rights &amp; endingracial injustice.
supporters have. Beautiful.#ImWithHer
Cuando los precios de los medicamentosaumentan astronómicamente vidas penden de un hilo—lahistoria de una familia:
Here's an easy way to help Hillary win in NewHampshire—it only takes 5 minutes!
Thousands of people are saying #ImWithHerbefore the New Hampshire primary! Don't miss your
3 days until NH heads to the polls! Here’s onething you can do right now to help Hillary—no matter whereyou live.
Only reaction to #GOPdebate? Bring it
.@RealDonaldTrump: “I’m the last person shewants to run against."
When Republican candidates describedeporting millions of immigrants &amp; repealing the ACA as"leadership."
Confirmed.
Here we go.
Knocking on doors and talking to voters insnowy Manchester, New
Things got exciting when Chelsea got her firsthit at softball. Hillary tells the
might be the one knocking!#HillaryInNH
Well done, @NYGovCuomo. LGBT kids don'tneed to be "cured" of anything.
Three days to New
Some of the toughest, hardest working leadersin America joined Hillary on the campaign trail in NewHampshire.
Watch live on @facebook: Hillary talks tostudents at @NewEngCollege about the issues on their
We’re fighting for the millions of people whocan’t wait.
"I'm fighting for the millions of people whocan’t wait." Hillary at
This young man’s story about depression isexactly why we can’t repeal or replace the Affordable CareAct.
goes door
A moment backstage in Manchester, NH: "I'mtaking care of my mom, she has
Time to #GOTVforHRC! Send an extra nudgeto a NH voter to make sure they vote by texting NOTE to47246
The New Hampshire primary is almost here!Ready to stand with Hillary? Say #ImWithHer and commit tovote:
You should never have to choose betweenyour family &amp; your paycheck. Proud of all weaccomplished with #FMLA23—next, paid leave for all.
"I’m proud of the experience and judgment Iwould bring to this job. A president has to be able to do ALLparts of the job."
"I’m a progressive who likes to get thingsdone. And I’ve learned that you have to be both a dreamerand a doer." —Hillary in
just gave our @HillaryforNH ClintonTeam Leader @avajjackson a shoutout in front of 1000s offired up NH
"Sen. Sanders &amp; I share big, progressivegoals for our country—but I believe I’ve laid out strongerplans for how to achieve them."
"We also need to break barriers of racism,sexism, discrimination against LGBT Americans, immigrants,&amp; people with disabilities."
"I want to break down all the barriers holdingAmericans back...but [our] problems can’t be reduced to WallStreet and Washington."
Hillary on the Flint water crisis: "Would it havehappened if they were rich and white instead of poor andblack?"
at 100 Club RT if youagree: We're here for YOU all the way
"I’m so proud of the campaign we’ve builthere. Thousands of volunteers are pouring your dreams anddetermination into this." —Hillary in
Watch live: Hillary speaks at the#NHdems2016 dinner in Manchester, 4 days before the NHprimary → hrc.io/1VWX3LC

.@BernieSanders I won't cut Social Security.As always, I'll defend it, &amp; I'll expand it. Enough falseinnuendos. hrc.io/socialsecurity
4 days until the NH primary! Join Team#GOTVforHRC—we'll send you one thing to do each day tohelp Hillary win ➡
4 days to the New Hampshire primary—what’sa little snow? Commit to vote for Hillary:
Families need a president who will deliverresults. We can’t wait for promises that can’t be kept.#DemDebate
“This. Is. An. Emergency.” Hillary on the Flintwater crisis at last night's
“If the kids in a rich suburb of Detroit had beendrinking contaminated water, there would have been
My heart is with @SybrinaFulton on Trayvon'sbirthday. Today I'm carrying the memories of his life sheshared with me.
In 1968, Shirley Chisholm became the firstAfrican American woman elected to Congress.#BlackHistoryMonth
for the President of the United States.t.co/lTSSpY4cc8
"Regardless of how hard the days are...begrateful."
In her closing statement, Hillary called outsome of the things she wished they’d brought up in the#DemDebate:
Let the world know that you’re proud to standwith Hillary. Get your free magnet now →
Share this if you agree.
Talking about a vote in 2002 is not a plan todefeat the threat of terrorism we face today.
✔️ Wall Street ✔️ Price-gouging pharmaceuticalcompanies ✔️ The gun lobby We will go after industries whenthey hurt families.
If you're a progressive who wants to get thingsdone, text ImWithHer to
Hillary está luchando por los que necesitanresultados. Ella no está haciendo promesas que no puedecumplir.
We already have Dodd-Frank. We need to gofurther to tackle dangerous risks in the big banks—andoutside the big banks.
We cannot let Wall Street wreck our economyever again.
"I'm fighting for people who cannot wait for[change]. And I'm not making promises that I cannot keep."#DemDebate
We need to crack down on Wall Street risk.Hillary's plan will actually do it. hrc.io/1L1SB8N
"I'm a progressive who gets things done.Cherry-picking a quote here or there doesn't change myrecord." —Hillary
If we're going to get into labels, it wasn't veryprogressive to vote against the Brady Bill five times, andimmigration reform.
This shouldn't be a debate about labels—itshould be about making progress. Share this if you agree.#DemDebate
Health care should be a human right. Weshould build on the Affordable Care Act—not start over.#DemDebate
"A progressive is someone who makesprogress. That's what I intend to do." —Hillary
"I'm fighting for people who cannot wait forthose changes, and I'm not making promises that I cannotkeep." —Hillary at
RT if you're cheering on Hillary tonight.#DemDebate
This is what a good day for progressives lookslike.
On the campaign trail in New Hampshire with@GabbyGiffords and
Amen.
This is what was waiting for Hillary when shearrived in NH after winning the Iowa caucus.
A woman winning the Iowa Caucus isn’t justsymbolic—it's "a huge deal for American women."—@emilyslist's @Schriock1
before goingonstage last night in Manchester to tell Granite Staters why#ImWithHer!
A new dad wrote to Hillary about his hopes forhis family:
As president, I would put an end to drugcompanies holding families hostage for profit.hrc.io/1UO1CHV
Shkreli &amp; Schiller's testimony today isanother reminder: Price gouging is reprehensible and we needto stop it. hrc.io/1UO1fgE
When drug companies like Valeant hike pricesfor profit, lives hang in the balance. One family’s
“As president, she won’t just say she’s goingto do something. She will follow through and actually do
There's no excuse for racism and violence on acollege campus. hrc.io/1SurlaQ
“Practice the discipline of gratitude.” Hillary onfaith, humility, and living a life of service.
La cárcel no es un substituto para larehabilitación—Hillary quiere hacer más para tratar a los quesufren de
We can dream big and fight for progressivevalues—AND make a real difference in Americans' lives. Thatis what we will do.
We have more to do for equality. We're goingto fight for LGBT rights, women's rights, voting rights,workers' rights—and more.
The ACA has brought health coverage tomillions of Americans. We are going to build on that progress,not start over.
It is absolutely unconscionable to lose 33,000Americans a year to gun violence. We are going to take on thegun lobby.
"We have a chance to build on the progresswe've made and to get results for people...that's my goal."—Hillary
"I am somebody who actually wants toproduce real results in people's lives. I am a progressive whogets results." —Hillary
We need to fix our criminal justice system andaddress substance use disorders. Prison is not a substitutefor treatment.
Yes, we need to crack down on Wall Street—but that's not enough. We need to go after corporationsthat hurt families.
"No bank is too big to fail. No executive is toobig to jail." —Hillary
Hillary on facing years of politically motivatedattacks: "I’m still standing and I will be
#DemTownHall Q: "How are you going todefend yourself against right-wing attacks?" Hillary: "I've hada lot of
The commander in chief must do everythingshe can to keep America safe—but military action shouldalways be the last resort.
#HillYes#ImWithHer
We have to protect the gains we've made onLGBT rights and women's rights—and do more to expandthem. That's what's at stake.
We need a Supreme Court that will protect ourrights—not corporations' right to buy elections. That's what'sat stake.
"They don't have to be for me. I will be forthem." —Hillary on voters who might not support
"We've focused on issues. We share a lot ofthe same progressive goals; we have different ways of goingabout them." —Hillary
We can’t afford to start over when it comes tothe Affordable Care Act and mental health
win in Iowa and are onfire in NH &amp; NV. Find out why they are out in force#HillYes
takes the stage in Manchester. Agreat day in Derry, Dover and Manchester. One more stop togo!
"Yo apoyo a Hillary porque ella apoya a lacomunidad inmigrante." —@Astrid_NV,
4) Hillary's not running to make a point—she'srunning to make a difference. She'll keep doing that. Pleasefeel free to keep
3) An important part of being a progressive ismaking progress. From health care to fighting inequality,Hillary's record speaks for
2) Now, if you do want to make it about who'sa "real progressive," @BernieSanders, what were you onthese days?
1) This shouldn't be a debate about who getsto define "progressive"—it should be about who will get realresults for American
.@BernieSanders says Hillary’s been aprogressive “some days.” Hillary
.@astrid_NV your courage and activism make areal difference. Honored to fight beside you—you're part ofthis team, not a press
“Appealing but ultimately empty promises [are]a luxury our loved ones cannot afford.”
"Some days" we're pretty proud
The middle class needs a raise, not a taxincrease. Families should be able to save, build, and
A 40-year record of progressive results—boiled down to "some
RT if you are,
With her historic win at the Iowa caucuses,Hillary just accomplished what no woman ever has
is inHampton. Watch us live!
&amp; tell Granite Staterswhy #ImWithHer.
While the other candidates "seem downrightterrified of the gun lobby, Hillary seems fearless."—@GabbyGiffords
"I know Hillary will fight for the issues mostimportant to me and to so many women and families."—@SenGillibrand
Hillary just became the first woman ever to winthe #IowaCaucus.
Ruline, this means the world to me.hrc.io/1QatzFY
Thank you,
“I will keep standing up for you. I will keepfighting for you." Hillary’s remarks the night she won the#IowaCaucus
#IowaCaucus:
Text CONGRATS to 47246 to tell Hillary you'llbe by her side for the next part of this
No matter who you are, what you look like,what faith you practice, or who you love: She’s fighting foryou.
Watch live: Hillary speaks in Nashua, NH aftera historic win in Iowa. 7 days to the #FITN
back to the Granite State this morning!
Sums it up.
History: made.
Are you with Hillary? Let her
Muchas gracias a todos los que trabajarontanto en Iowa. Mañana continuaremos
So grateful to everyone who gives your all tosupport this campaign. You made this
Hillary agradece desde el fondo de su corazónel esfuerzo de todos en
From the bottom of my heart: Thank you, Iowa.-H
RT if you're on her side all the way to the WhiteHouse.
"I will keep doing what I’ve done my entire life.I will keep standing up for you. I will keep fighting for
It’s time to go caucus, Iowa! Find yourcaucus location and get there by 6:30 pm!
Team @hillaryforIA has been organizing withheart and winning every single day.
Know an Iowan who’s not sure who they’recaucusing for tonight? Retweet
The problems that are holding Americanfamilies back are serious, they are urgent, and they call forreal
Text TONIGHT to 47246 to be one of the firstto hear from the campaign after the #iowacaucus
Hey, Iowa: The caucuses begin in three hours!Caucusing for Hillary is as easy as 1, 2, 3—watch
America can’t wait. Families need their nextpresident to roll up her sleeves and make a difference in theirlives right
A few moments with @billclinton behind thescenes in Iowa.
"You're entitled to give these remarks the lovediscount—but everything I've told you, I believe with all myheart."
Coffee break on Caucus Day in Des Moines,Iowa.
Caucus Day is here, Iowa! Text CAUCUS to47246 to find your caucus location and make a plan to getthere by 6:30 p.m. She's counting on
At 102 years old, Iowan Ruline Steininger haspretty much seen it all—except for this.
Hillary is "one of the finest Secretary of Stateswe've had." —@POTUS
This is it—the #IowaCaucus is today! If you’restanding with Hillary, RT to say
This #BlackHistoryMonth, we honor those whosacrificed for equality &amp; fought for justice, and werecognize those who carry on the legacy.
.@billclinton shares three stories to explain whyHillary’s the “single best changemaker” he’s ever
The Force is strong with this one.hrc.io/20iOdhQ
Today is the #IAcaucus! RT to say #ImWithHer,and make sure your friends and family know where to caucusat 6:30 pm:
It's #IAcaucus day! If you're standing withHillary, let her know why by tweeting with
Today’s the day! Ready to stand with Hillary?Say #ImWithHer now:
.@billclinton took over Hillary’s Snapchat totake you behind the scenes in Iowa.
From the first roundtable in April to the finalrally before the caucuses. Let's make history,
The Iowa Caucus is less than 24 hours away. Ifyou have her back, make sure she knows:
Don’t miss Hillary and @billclinton live from thelast rally before the Iowa Caucus—watch here:
To congregations across SC rememberingvictims of gun violence close to home and around the countrytoday: We're with you. -H
To: Iowa From:
This is it: Less than 24 hours to go until theIowa Caucus. Can you help Hillary by talking to a few
"What I believe a president has to do is toreally listen to what's on the minds of our
For this Iowa couple, caucusing is a familyaffair.
Thousands of people "have better lives, andlearned more...just because of her."
Follow Hillary on Instagram to see the familyselfie!
Pausing backstage in Cedar Rapids, Iowa tocapture the moment.
Fighting to improve the lives of kids andfamilies since day one of her career.
“Speaking is hard for me. But, come January, Iwant to say these two words: Madam President.”—@gabbygiffords
Let's say with one voice: The days ofmillionaires paying a lower tax rate than teachers, nurses, orfirefighters are
True in Beijing in 1995, true today: Women'srights are human rights. This center should remain—I standwith Guo. hrc.io/1JQCWy3
"Here’s what I know about Hillary: She’s thesingle best changemaker I’ve ever met in my life."—@billclinton
“Mrs. Clinton has done her homework onpretty much any subject you’d care to name.”
"She wasn't elected to anything—she justmade something good happen." @billclinton on Hillary's workfor kids in AR:
What’s happening in Flint is unconscionable—and there are too many other Flints out there.hrc.io/1JQoTbL
“I will get up every single day and keep fightingfor the kind of America we all want and deserve for our
"What I heard in those early days has stuckwith me." Hillary on the first 10 months of the
“One of the most broadly and deeply qualifiedpresidential candidates in modern history.”
as she preps for the Iowa caucuses!t.co/QgwwG72heh
checked all of Lily's boxes inAmes today. #ImWithHer
Making friends in Hanover,
.@ChelseaClinton is taking over our Instagramaccount from Iowa today! Follow along:
Wow. Thank you, Nashua! #603forHRC
Time is running out to tell Hillary you'restanding with her before the Iowa caucus! Commit
.@BillClinton's closing argument for Hillary:"She's the best changemaker I’ve ever met." Watch the newvideo ⬇️
We need to say loudly and clearly: We will notlet Wall Street wreck Main Street
¡No te lo pierdas!
"Health care is a basic right. We are 90 percentcovered—we gotta get to 100 percent."
#iacaucus
Heart to heart in Newton,
“I have seen many incredible things...I lookforward to seeing a woman president."
This campaign, in 100 amazing
Three days to #iacaucus. Say #ImWithHer:hrc.io/TWcommit3
Don't miss your chance to stand with Hillarybefore the #IAcaucus! Say #ImWithHer with your customcommit card:
Trump wasn’t at the latest #GOPdebate—buthis ideas certainly were.
Hillary is handing over her Snapchat accountto @billclinton today! Don’t miss
Thrilled @POTUS is making sure women—especially women of color—aren't shortchanged at work.hrc.io/1SObpjl #EqualPayCantWait
"I've spent my life fighting for children, families,and our country—and I'm not stopping
"Women across this country need more thanrhetoric; they need action." —@Lilly_Ledbetter
Congrats, Cedrick—what an achievement foryou, your family, and your teacher! hrc.io/1nCHWwr
We can’t let Republicans take us back topolicies that failed us in the past. Add your name if you agree:hrc.io/1QIzaIh
#GOPdebate: Lots of bickering, no real plansto strengthen families or keep us
With every Republican attacking safe and legalabortion, women need more than an ally in the White House:We need a fighter.
Reproductive rights are human rights. Women—not any of the politicians on stage—should make decisionsabout their own health.
Look real hard—you still won't find anyonesupporting equal pay, paid leave, or reproductive rights at#GOPdebate.
Here you go, @JebBush: hrc.io/1P122H4
Aunque Donald Trump no está participando enel #GOPdebate, sus ideas están
Donald Trump isn't on stage at the#GOPdebate—but you can bet the same backwards ideasand out-of-touch rhetoric will be out in
The #GOPdebate has one thing right: If youwant to protect and build on the progress President Obamahas made, Hillary's your
Four days! (Iowans, confirm where to caucus:hrc.io/TWcommit4)
.@POTUS worked hard to secure health carecoverage for millions of Americans—our next president has toprotect that
There’s a great story behind this unusualcampaign stop.
We will go after pharmaceutical companiesthat gouge patients with pricing. They are wrong, and we willstop them.
right here:t.co/horvoFX6gQ
Predatory drug pricing is unjustified. It iswrong. And it needs to stop.
“It’s clear she knows how to get thingsaccomplished in these crazy political times."—@IAStartingLine
To everyone raising their voice to support thiscampaign: It means more than you know. Thank you. -H
More proof that women need a president whowill stop attacks on women's health in their
"The Academy has to catch up with ourreality." —Hillary on the Oscars’ diversity
Honored to host you@MotherBethel last night. U inspired &amp; encouraged us&amp; left a lasting impression on many. Praying 4
Join thousands of people saying #ImWithHerbefore the Iowa caucus:
Grateful to have a moment of reflection andcommunity with faith leaders from across the country inPhiladelphia today. Thank you all.
The NRA has called the shots long enough.@SenBlumenthal and @RepAdamSchiff on why we need torepeal gun immunity:
Leaving no door un-knocked in Iowa. Sayyou're with Hillary: hrc.io/1nQebI7 (:
Reproductive rights are human rights. Denyingthem isn’t just a violation—it puts lives at risk. We can’t goback.
Today &amp; every day, we have an obligationto confront hate, advance human rights, &amp; help thosefleeing persecution. #HolocaustMemorialDay
No matter who you are, what you look like, orwhere you come from—you deserve a president who will fightfor you.
5 days to #iacaucus. Here are a few ways yourfive bucks help Hillary win in Iowa:
Gun makers should be held accountable forendangering Americans. I voted against immunity—it's time torepeal it. -H
Inequality stalks our education
5 days to
on Feb. 9. Commit to vote here → t.co/5PYLTuJcYh
The Iowa caucus is coming up fast! Say#ImWithHer and commit to vote or caucus in your
will build on it when sheis in WH.
We need to raise incomes to lift families out ofpoverty.
A president should do everything she can notjust to protect reproductive rights, but to advance
What's happening in Flint should break all ourhearts—and spur us to action. If you are able, give toflintkids.org.
We've come too far to let Republicans take usback. Commit to vote or caucus for Hillary.
Whether you're 9 or 99, you can help electHillary. Step one:
At the #DemTownHall, a young voter askedHillary about her record of fighting income
Step 1: Commit to vote or caucus for Hillary →hrc.io/1TmmreY Step 2: Tell the world with your own card
No one should have to work around the clockjust to get by.
This is it: The caucuses and primaries arealmost here. If you're with Hillary, say so:
El virus Zika destaca la importancia de laeducación, investigación y financiación de la salud
The Zika virus underscores the importance ofpublic health education, funding and research. What youshould know: hrc.io/1nNsVYm
Ready to stand with Hillary? Say #ImWithHerwith your custom commit card: hrc.io/TWcommit
Gender equality and economic equality gohand in hand. You can't fight for one without understandingthe
today!Women &amp; girls deserve a feminist woman in the WhiteHouse → t.co/hi2awFgEtJ
Cada persona en este país merece ser tratadacon respeto.
"Every person in this country deserves to betreated with respect.” —Hillary
We don't make America greater by insulting,demeaning, and demonizing our communities. We're betterthan that.
The president has to strengthen the economy,fight for families, and keep the country safe. That's the
"Military action should be the last resort—notthe first choice." —Hillary
"I have a 40-year record of going afterinequality.” —Hillary
Hillary tiene décadas de experiencia y estápreparada para continuar el progreso alcanzado por elPresidente Obama.
"The other side is not talking issues—they'retalking insults." —Hillary
"We've got to do everything we possibly cannot to let the Republicans rip away our progress and take usbackwards." —Hillary
When it comes to protecting and building onPresident Obama’s progress, there’s only one candidate whowill get it done.
Una tristeza. Las familias que necesitan agualimpia no deberían tener miedo de pedir ayuda.
We are a nation of second chances, especiallyfor young people. Good news from SCOTUS today.hrc.io/1RK1kni
Heartbreaking. Families who need clean, safedrinking water shouldn't have to be afraid to ask for help.hrc.io/1OTpu92
People all over America are sending texts toIowa (and you can too!).
See the best moments from @corybooker’s tripto Iowa!
"We can raise incomes if we start payingwomen the equal pay we deserve for our
this afternoon #ImWithHer
Not being able to vote yet isn’t stopping 17-year-old Patrick from doing everything he can to elect
remains committed to our
One week. #iacaucus
There is no excuse for letting greed get in theway of people's health. Companies like these should beashamed.
on the campaign trail lastnight in Iowa #ImwithHer #StandwithHRC
Don’t live in Iowa but want to help get out thecaucus? Retweet ☝️ this ☝️ to share with someone who
Live in Iowa? Learn how to caucus here!
A quick stop for lunch in Cedar Rapids with@CoryBooker
No Wall Street hedge fund manager shouldpay a lower tax rate than a teacher or a
“The presidency is not an entry-level
You can’t confront income inequality withoutconfronting gender inequality.
t.co/MBwAPWZzdi#FITN
Thank you, Marion, IA!
“What are our children going to say about yourpresidency beyond ‘she was the first
It’s 2016. The days of dismissing the pay gapas a "women's issue" are
Our favorite Snapchatting senator,@CoryBooker, is taking over Hillary’s account. Follow along
No matter who you are, what you look like, orwho you love—you deserve a president who will fight for
for president! t.co/kHLiJa2lt6
It’s time to reclaim our democracy. We need tooverturn Citizens United, fix our campaign finance system,and protect voting
"Our next president can’t shy away frombuilding on the progress of President Obama."
51% of public school students qualify for freeor reduced-cost lunch. During #PovertyAwareness Month,let's commit to raising
I'll work my heart out for Iowans and Americanfamilies every day. Honored to have the @DMRegister'ssupport—9 days to the caucus!
hasneeded knowledge, experience: t.co/Bs8kzgsbCh
Today in 1997, @madeleine—a diplomat,author, and humanitarian—became the first woman secretaryof state.
To all the #Hillary2016 volunteers canvassingin the cold today: you are champions! (:
T minus 9 days to Iowa—RT to make sureevery caucus-goer sees this video.
“We worked with Hillary Clinton. Here’s howwe know she’s committed to fighting climate
&amp;@JeanneShaheen! #603forHRC
We’ve come too far to let Republicans take usback. The fight for women’s reproductive rights is far fromover.
Love @HGTV? Hillary does, too! Here’s whyshe finds home makeover shows so
10 days to Iowa! Add your name to get a dailyemail on how to help Hillary win the caucus:
"Most people remember my son’s death, but Iremember his life." Gwen Carr, mother of Eric
"There is never a day ... in the Oval Office thatyou can't make something good happen for somebody." -@billclinton
"In a political landscape this hostile toreproductive rights, words matter — as do their absence." -NARAL's @ilyseh
"Women need more than a vote or asupportive statement; we need a fighter in the White House."—@cecilerichards
33,000 people are killed by guns every year.We’re better than that—we need commonsense reform
You shouldn’t have to be rich to make yourvoice heard. Hillary on why it’s time to reverse CitizensUnited:
Mayor of Flint: “This isn't something that'sgoing to go away.”
This election is about who can get things doneand build on the progress we’ve
No one would tolerate these conditions in awealthy suburb. Detroit students and teachers deserve better.-H
"I'm fighting for everyone who's ever beenknocked down but refused to be knocked
The progress we’ve made under @POTUS isremarkable. Hillary on how we can keep it
We need to protect and build on the AffordableCare Act, not start over with another contentious
A reminder of what we're all fighting
It's no surprise that two billionaire hedge fundmanagers have launched an ad blitz against
call next week.Register:
A year from today, a new president will start tobuild on @POTUS' legacy, or dismantle it. That's personal tome. hrc.io/1lvt7K9
In exactly one year, we’ll make history—or turnback the clock on the progress we've
Climate change is real. It’s hurting our planetand our people. We can’t afford a president who ignores thescience.
We need a president who will fight for allAmericans, not just those at the
If we want American families to get ahead, wehave to make college, child care, and health care
Really Senator Sanders? How can you say thatgroups like @PPact and @HRC are part of the "establishment"you're taking on?
I'm so sorry to hear about this terrible tragedy.My heart goes out to Braden's family and colleagues. -H
Sarah Palin's got Trump's back. If you want tokeep Republicans like them out of the White House, add yourname now:
Every single American should be outraged atwhat’s happening in Flint, Michigan.
You shouldn't have to worry about yourpaycheck or your job when you have a baby or someone inyour family gets
LGBT kids don’t need to be “cured,” they needto be loved and
Thank you,
Is 'ClearChoice' for President: t.co/prA3BlGtUP
Our fight for equality must continue to ensuretransgender people are treated with equal rights and
The NRA. Big pharma. The Koch brothers.American families need a champion to defend them fromspecial interests.
"She is the one person who can bring atremendous amount of experience to the job of being a worldleader."
.@POTUS' action should be upheld so familiescan stay together and live without fear of deportation.
comments on LGBTequality #StandwithHRC #HILLARY2016 t.co/Lng4MzepLJ
.@HRC You have fought with persistence andgreat courage for LGBT equality. From one "HRC" to another—I’m proud to have your support.
Health care. Gun violence prevention.Immigration. Hillary's been fighting for progressive issues herentire career.
“Do you think that when you’re president,you’ll be paid as much as a
Catch Hillary on @maddow tonight at 9pm
The next president has to be able to stand upto Republicans and stop their backward
Two weeks to
Dr. King's fight for equality in education, ineconomic opportunity, and in our criminal justice system isstill our fight today.
Texts from Hillary, debate night edition. If youwant in, text WATCH to 47246.
The children of Flint have been drinking lead-poisoned water for more than a year. That’s absolutelyunacceptable.
"Making sure all Americans have clean air andwater isn’t just a health issue. It’s a civil rights issue." —Hillaryin Columbia,
We can’t afford to undo @POTUS’ progress.Health care for millions of Americans is too
says what she'sgoing to do and how. I'm with
There’s only one candidate who will defendand build on the progress we've made.
No questions at #DemDebate, but we'll say itnow: The women of America deserve a champion in the WhiteHouse.
What’s happening with the water in Flint,Michigan is an outrage. hrc.io/1ZuZoyr
"If the kids in a rich suburb of Detroit had beendrinking contaminated water, we would have done somethingabout it." —Hillary
We have a choice: elect a president with yearsof experience working with other leaders to keep the worldsafe, or not.
The threats we face are real. The nextpresident will take office in a year—and he or she needs a realplan to defeat terrorism.
This election is not only about choosing apresident—it's also about choosing our next commander inchief.
We need a president with the experience andexpertise to lead in the world and keep America safe. That'sHillary.
Climate change is real. We can’t afford apresident who'd deny it instead of taking action.
"There should be no bank too big to fail and noindividual too big to jail." —Hillary
"There needs to be a concerted effort toaddress the systemic racism in our criminal justice system."#DemDebate
We need a president who will make qualityhigher education a reality for every American.
"I will go anywhere to meet with anyone at anytime to find common ground." —Hillary
Senator Sanders is right: Hillary has beencommitted to universal health care for decades.
The ACA is one of the greatestaccomplishments of President Obama, the Democratic Party,and America. We shouldn't go backwards.
"I don't want to see us start over again. I wantus to defend and build on the Affordable Care Act andimprove it." —Hillary
"I am absolutely committed to universal healthcare. I've worked on this for a long time."
We need a president who will always, alwaysput American families over the gun lobby.
We must end mass incarceration—reformmandatory minimum sentences for nonviolent offenses,increase mental health &amp; drug treatment, &amp;
It's wrong that black men are more likely thanwhite men to be stopped by police, charged with crimes, andsentenced to longer prison
"There needs to be a concerted effort toaddress the systemic racism in our criminal justice system."—Hillary
It's time to choose once and for all: Will westand with the NRA, or stand up to it?
Hillary has only received one F in her life andshe's proud of it: from the NRA.
Among the top issues Hillary will work towardin her first 100 days as president: "Finally, getting equal payfor women's work."
Democrats all agree that affordable health careshould be a right. We need a real plan to get it done.#DemDebate
"We need a president who can do all aspectsof the job...I'm ready to take it on." —Hillary
"We have to get the economy working andincomes rising for everyone—including those who have beenleft behind for too long."
“What we have to do is protect the Obamalegacy...and Hillary Clinton is that person.”
Text BACKSTAGE to 47246 to get behind-the-scenes updates from Hillary at the #DemDebate
"We have a lot of friends in this race, but wehave one true champion." -@cecilerichards
"You have the power to choose a nomineewho will protect everything we’ve achieved—and stopRepublicans from dragging us backward."
"I’ll fight to close the loophole that theCharleston shooter slipped through when he bought his gun."—Hillary
"In one year and four days, a new president isgoing to walk into the Oval Office—we can't afford for it to bea Republican." —Hillary in
@TUSK81 What wonderful news to hear you'recancer-free. What a great way to start the New Year. Nowhave that glass of wine!
A Democratic president is the only thingpreventing @PPFA from being
Relieved that American prisoners are cominghome from Iran. We must keep working for the return ofRobert Levinson.
volunteers!
Hillary picked a @nytimes reader question outof a hat. Watch her answer →
Hillary made clear this week: What’shappening with the water in Flint, Michigan is an
.@POTUS wants to require universalbackground checks and hold gun manufacturers accountable.If you agree, sign on:
“This is incredibly
.@JimmyFallon: Can we do a Snapchat? Hillary: Sure!
.@jimmyfallon interviewed Hillary for the job ofpresident.
Text BACKSTAGE to 47246 to get behind-the-scenes updates from Hillary as she gets ready for#DemDebate on
Meet Fayde. He's 8 years old, and his favoritethings are Star Wars, chocolate chip pancakes, and HillaryClinton.
Hillary and @CecileRichards on politics,mansplaining, and reproductive rights:
What would our country look like under aRepublican president? Here’s a glimpse.
A right without the opportunity to exercise itisn't a right. Low-income women deserve health care. TheHyde Amendment should be
"I would like to see Planned Parenthood evenget more funding." How to ensure all women have access tohealth care:
in NH Democratic primary: t.co/dQKaMnfQoP #603forHRC
No podemos permitir que este tipo detragedias sigan sucediendo. Nelba perdió a su hija en lamasacre de Sandy Hook.
On the trail in New Hampshire this week,@billclinton told one of his favorite stories about
Just this once, Trump's right: New Yorkersvalue hard work, diversity, tolerance, resilience, and buildingbetter lives for our families.
.@jimmyfallon asked: Does Trump intimidateyou? Hillary: “No.”
A Republican president would undo @POTUS’progress on climate, guns, immigration, and a whole lot
Need a good laugh after watching#GOPdebate? Catch Hillary on @fallontonight
2 1/2 hours of this? Imagine 4 years.hrc.io/GOPdebate
They may be arguing, but they agree on somuch: denying climate change, repealing Obamacare, andcutting taxes for the wealthy.
We cannot afford a Republican in the WhiteHouse. Get your *free* sticker. →
What you're really hearing at the #GOPdebate:More tax cuts for corporations and the wealthy, no real plansfor the middle
A 10% flat tax? A CEO should never be payingthe same rate as a kindergarten teacher.
Had enough? Do something about it:hrc.io/1nmBvNm
Let’s be clear: Islam isn't our enemy. Hatefulrhetoric against Muslims isn't just wrong—it plays intoterrorists' hands.
This is Muslim Americans' country too. Thenext president should know that—and act like it.
#TBT
thisweekend!
Comprehensive background checks wouldensure those who can responsibly own guns do—and thosewho can’t, don't.
Nobody's attacking the Second Amendment.We can protect Americans' rights—and also protect familiesfrom gun violence.
If the thought of a Republican president in2017 terrifies you, text FUTURE to
Here's the truth: You can't make Americagreater by insulting, shaming, and demonizing the people ofAmerica.
Supporting Planned Parenthood, the ACA, andSupreme Court justices who will protect Americans' rights?Count on it.
Psst: There's only one candidate—on eitherside—who's prepared to be commander in chief.#GOPdebate
We can't go back to cowboy diplomacy andreckless war-mongering. We need a real foreign policy for thefuture. #GOPdebate: not cutting
Our economy—and country—are better offthanks to President Obama and hardworking Americans.Anyone who says otherwise is wrong.
What might 2017 look like under a Republicanpresident? Follow to see (spoiler: not good) →hrc.io/briefing2017
Always a great time with @jimmyfallon. Thanksfor snapping with us! (:
Hillary sat down with @CecileRichards and@refinery29 to discuss what’s at stake in the 2016 election.Hint: A lot.
Hillary "has the experience and right judgmentto deliver results for families across the country."—@EricHolder
.@lorellapraeli on the human cost of our brokenimmigration system and her mother's first trip to Peru in 16years.
Health care should be a right for everyAmerican. We should build on the progress we've made withthe ACA—not go back to square
"From the time I met her 45 years ago thisMarch, she's the best changemaker I've ever known."—@billclinton
We’re better than
TONIGHT 1/13at 10PM ET/PT on @LifetimeTV.
What would a State of the Union be like undera Republican president? Here’s a disturbing
It’s time to pick a side: Stand with the gunlobby or stand up to it.
From protecting voting rights to challengingdiscrimination, @EricHolder was one of our finest AttorneysGeneral. Honored by his support.
Ending the gun industry’s immunity fromlawsuits is critical to tackling the epidemic of gun violence inAmerica.
.@POTUS by the numbers: 18 million insured,14 million new jobs, 27 executive actions to stop gunviolence...
We can't let Republicans rip away @POTUS’progress. Add your name if you agree:
Seven years of progress. We need to build onit—not go backwards.
Couldn't agree more with @POTUS: We needto make voting easier, not harder.
.@POTUS ha mantenido la economía fuerte yel país seguro. Eso es lo que el presidente tiene que hacer. Essu deber.
.@POTUS has kept the economy strong andthe country safe. That's what the president needs to do.That’s the job.
We can't afford a president who won't admitclimate change is real. It's real. It's a fact. And we will takeaction.
Thanks to @POTUS, 18 million Americans arecovered under the ACA. We won't put their health care intothe hands of Republicans.
.@POTUS is confirming what we know: Oureconomy—and our country—are stronger under a Democraticpresident.
.@POTUS is right: Progress isn't inevitable. Wehave a choice between pushing forward—or undoing all thework we've done.
America is better because of @POTUS'leadership. Proud to call him my friend. Let’s build on hisprogress. #SOTU
“An open seat at the State of the Union willhonor gun violence victims—including my 6-year-old.”hrc.io/1TTDiUA
A year from now, a new president will walk intothe Oval Office. We can't afford to let it be a
You can sue a company for making an unsafetoy—but not for making an assault rifle used to kill
A Republican president could stack theSupreme Court with justices who will rip away all of theprogress we’ve made.
Thank you,
Our criminal justice system is broken. We needto end mass incarceration and close private
Immigration raids are sowing discord and fearamong our communities. We should end them.
"We have systemic racism and bias that isimplicit in our [criminal justice] system."
Hillary at tonight’s
"Reproductive rights are a fundamental humanright. No government should tell a woman what she can dowith her body." —Hillary at
when asked if she’d vote torepeal the Hyde Amendment she responds
"We've got to disrupt the school to prisonpipeline—we need a cradle to college pipeline." —Hillary
"We have systemic racism and bias that isimplicit in our [criminal justice] system." —Hillary
"I am going to end private detention centers. Iam going to end family detention." —Hillary at
believes we should not beconducting raids and roundups that sow fear and division inour communities
"I do not think raids are an appropriate tool toenforce immigration laws...They are sowing discord and fear."—Hillary at
"You stand for everything that I want in apresident.” —@theellenshow
One of these people could decide the future ofyour rights.
How does a presidential candidate spend anight with friends? Find out on @TheConversation with@amandadecadenet.
Thank you, @GabbyGiffords and@ShuttleCDRKelly.
vowed to take on barriers toabortion access—incl. the #HydeAmendment, which sheopposed publicly as FLOTUS.
calls #HB2 Texas court case"the biggest challenge to Roe v. Wade in a generation."t.co/xhnWsUAdTT
Backstage at @TheEllenShow! Tune in today tosee Hillary play Heads Up! and talk selfies with
as she fights for the Democratic Presidentialnomination.
"Young people need a president who will standup to inaction [on guns]...that person is Hillary." -@SybrinaFulton
We're not going to raise incomes for middle-class families by raising their
Sunday inspiration: A little cold is no match for@HillaryforIA organizers and
is that person.#ImWithHer
Honored to have @GabbyGiffords and@ShuttleCDRKelly's support.
&amp; @CecileRichards.
Affordable health care should be a basichuman right—no matter what kind of medical history youhave.
@HillaryforIA win#IowaCaucus
This 19-year-old voter in New Hampshire wason the fence until he heard @billclinton speak on Hillary'sexperience.
We need to make it easier for parents tobalance the demands of work and
Our next president could have the power totransform the Supreme Court for generations.
What @AbbyWambach
Republican candidates are putting the NRA’sinterests ahead of the safety of our families and
This father wrote a letter to his daughters tomake sure they know nothing should stand in the way of theirdreams:
A judge in Alabama still opposes marriageequality—and so does every single Republican
Hillary, Ellen, and @tonygoldwyn duked it outin a game of Heads Up! on @TheEllenShow. Tune in onMonday!
.@lenadunham is taking over Hillary'sInstagram today! Follow for updates from the
The new jobs report confirms: The economy isstronger with a Democrat in the White House.
It's a make-or-break moment for SCOTUSappointments—we can’t afford to let a GOP president decide.Hillary's op-ed:
An expectant mother in Iowa asked: What areyour plans for parental and maternity
As @POTUS spoke powerfully on protectingkids from gun violence, @realDonaldTrump said end gun freeschool zones. We deserve better.
2016 should be remembered as the yearAmerica decided to take on gun violence.
The safety of our families is more importantthan the interests of the NRA. Full stop.
Why @PPact broke with tradition to endorseHillary:
.@CecileRichards Completely appropriate.
Proud to support a lifelongchampion for women's health. See you in NH. Talk soon tocoordinate pantsuits? Too
will be achampion for women &amp; families, incl ensuring up to 12weeks of #paidleave.
4 reasons we can't let Republicans take theirattacks on Planned Parenthood and women's rights to theWhite House:
I'll take on Republicans or anyone who tries tointerfere with women's health. Proud to have @PPact'ssupport in this important election.
Yesterday was a preview of what wouldhappen under a Republican president. Every single GOPcandidate would defund Planned Parenthood.
“It’s important to stand up to bullies whereverthey are.”
Climate change isn't some abstract futurethreat—it threatens our families and economy right now. Weneed to act.
LGBT kids don’t need to be “cured” ofanything.
Marriage equality is the law of the land—andthat includes Alabama. -H
Anyone who wants to be president shouldhave a plan to make a real difference for Americans withautism.
Planned Parenthood defunded and 3 morereasons a Republican president would be a nightmare forwomen's health:
Republicans just voted to repeal Obamacareand defund Planned Parenthood. Good thing we have aDemocratic president:
We have to defend our progress on access tohealth care. Add your name if you agree:
If any of the GOP candidates were presidenttoday, Planned Parenthood would now be defunded &amp;the ACA repealed. We can't let that happen.
This is the only comprehensive plan from apresidential candidate to support families with
Happy birthday, Kate McKinnon! The feeling'smutual.
It's a disgrace that the government is makingmoney off of lending to college students. We need to
If you can refinance a car payment, you shouldbe able to refinance your student
What we learned from @billclinton’s first stopon the campaign trail:
“Dare to compete.” Hillary tells @hardball_chrisabout the athlete who inspired her to run for
.@billclinton shares memories from when hefirst met Hillary:
This is a promise: I will always protect awoman's right to make her own health decisions. Honored tohave your support, @NARAL.
In 2016, everything we’ve accomplishedtogether is on the
“She just makes things happen.” —@billclintonon the trail in New Hampshire this
Tune in tonight to catch Hillary on @hardball!Sneak preview:
called for WallStreet accountability a year before the crisis.
"You rise or fall on the people who are withyou." -@BillClinton If you’re with Hillary, text VOLUNTEER to47246.
.@POTUS just took action to#StopGunViolence. Here's how we build on that progress:hrc.io/1R9AtAJ
.@POTUS is right: We can protect the SecondAmendment while protecting our families and communitiesfrom gun violence. And we have
“I don’t want to keep operating on childrenwho’ve been shot.”
“I'm a little feminist growing up to help allwomen with equal rights.” Olivia joins the volunteer team atHQ.
in NewHampshire today. #ImWithHer
We need a fighter for children and families inthe White House.
Dr. Sakran nearly died after a gunshot woundat 17. Today, he's a trauma surgeon fighting to end gunviolence.
There is power in sharing our struggles—andthe fight against diseases like Alzheimer’s is one we can
We need a president who will stand up to thegun lobby. Add your name if you agree:
A Republican president would delight inreversing @POTUS's progress. We can’t let that
This election isn’t about style or rhetoric; it’sabout tackling the issues that American families face everyday.
Americans need a president who has what ittakes to get the job
It's outrageous that many U.S. moms have togo back to work a few weeks after having a baby—and toomany dads get no parental leave at
A young man in NH asked: How are you goingto make sure me and my brothers are safe from gun violenceat school?
You can’t argue with the facts: The economydoes better with a Democrat in the White
She’s a Grammy-award winning grandma—plus three more surprising facts about
It’s way too difficult in America to have both ajob and a family. In some states, child care costs more thancollege tuition—that's
We can’t afford to let a Republican take theoath of office next
#Hillary2016 starts the new year stronger thanever. To everyone who has supported this campaign:
94% of our fourth quarter donations were $100or less, and more than 60% of donors were
The numbers are in: In the fourth quarter,people gave more than $55 million—$37M to the campaign,and $18M to the Democratic
Happy New
Chip in $1 before 2016 to keep the momentumgoing! hrc.io/2015
What photographers on the campaign trail sawin 2015: hrc.io/1mmoTpp
Tonight’s fundraising deadline is about morethan money—it's about standing together. If you're with me,chip in: hrc.io/1R0RDR2
38 states, 524 town hall questions, 89,399birthday wishes, and more: 2015, by the
What happened when Hillary and John McCainwent head-to-head in a drinking
"I know what it's like to go into the primariesup. And I know what it's like to come out of them
We need to make it easier for women to getahead at work while still being there for their
that I'd love to helpexpand the rights under the ADA for millions of Americans#Hillary2016
6 texts from Hillary you might have missed thisyear...
We need a president who can take onRepublicans and get the job
No parent should have to bury a child due tosubstance use. It's time we get serious about investing intreatment.
It shouldn’t be so hard to be a working
Middle class families shouldn't be shoulderinga tax burden while those at the top
We can make families stronger by cuttingtaxes, raising the minimum wage, and making sure womenget equal pay for equal
Whether she's working with world leaders orworking across the aisle, we need a president who gets thingsdone:
We can't let Republicans rip away ourprogress and give more tax breaks to corporations and thoseat the
There’s no reason for teachers and nurses toever pay higher tax rates than top
It’s time we treat diseases like Alzheimer’s withthe seriousness they deserve.
Little feminists, moms, love stories—some ofthe most heartwarming campaign moments of 2015:hrc.io/1OiIG3f
We should treat the caretakers who serve 11million Americans with serious medical needs like the heroesthey are.
Parades and yellow ribbons aren't enough. Ourveterans deserve world-class health care, benefits, andopportunities.
We have to do more to support people withAlzheimer's, and the families that care for them.hrc.io/1mKI3Fe
An Iowa fifth grader asked: "What are yougoing to do about all this
Hot peppers and selfies: 48 hours on thecampaign trail.
This dad is doing everything he can to makethis country a better place for his daughters. Read his letter tothem:
Wishing everyone the best this Kwanzaa. To allcelebrating—Bill and I send you our warmest wishes.
"If you would like help with your campaign, Iam available and I would work for candy."
Captain Khan saved the lives of his entire unitwhen he bravely stepped forward to investigate a suspiciousvehicle.
Can't think of a better day than one withfamily, food, and the best gift of all: a new grandchild on theway! Merry Christmas.
Merry
American families like progress a lot. But thegrinches in GOPville? It seems they do not.
For the families of 5.4 million Americans, acure for Alzheimer's can’t come soon
A win for voting rights in Virginia. No oneshould have to wait hours to exercise their right to
Happy holidays! Text HOLIDAY to 47246 tohear a message from
An Iowa fifth grader asked Hillary: “What areyou going to do about all this
There’s something wrong when so manyfamilies have such a hard time affording basic needs.hrc.io/1OLy0q7
Your loved ones deserve the best care—without you having to worry about your
Happy holidays! Text HOLIDAY to 47246 tohear a message from
@abbynicole1123 It was a wonderfulconversation. Thanks for the
and@MariaShriver in the fight to treat and prevent Alzheimer’sdisease:
No one should live in fear because of who theyare—we must combat the growing crisis of violence againsttransgender
We can make an Alzheimer’s cure possible by2025, changing life for millions of Americans.
"Under my plan, Medicare will covercomprehensive Alzheimer’s care-planning sessions." Hillaryon @Quora:
.@Quora asked: "How close are we to a curefor Alzheimer’s?" A cure could be possible by
Every child deserves a loving family. We mustfight discrimination against LGBT parents trying to
A Republican president could nominate asmany as 4 Supreme Court justices. Why that should terrifyyou:
for taking the fight to Alzheimers! Couldn't beprouder to be a part of your
We can prevent, effectively treat, and make acure possible for Alzheimer’s by 2025.
for the most amazing present ever!#HillaryForTheHolidays
and I arethrilled for Chelsea, Marc and Charlotte’s growing family in2016!
Your dad and I could not be happier for you,Marc, and Charlotte. We’re so excited to meet our secondgrandchild! -H
It is time to put an end to conversion therapyfor minors. We should be supporting LGBT kids—not trying tochange
The president has to keep families safe andmake the economy grow for everyone—not just those at thetop.
Hillary’s best #DemDebate moments,illustrated:
and Team #603forHRC crushedit at the #DemDebate. See the photos:
Here’s what people were texting Hillary whileshe was on the debate stage.
Prison is not a substitute for treatment for drugaddiction and mental health issues.
Hillary is the only candidate on stage who haspledged not to raise taxes on the middle class.
Ningún estudiante debería pedir un préstamopara pagar su colegiatura.
The Affordable Care Act is working—and it'stoo important to repeal. hrc.io/reasons
.@BernieSanders only one candidate on stagevoted to strip the government of power to regulate Wall Street—and it wasn’t Hillary.
Hillary is the candidate in this race with theexperience to be commander-in-chief. Text QUALIFIED to47246 if you agree.
After decades of fighting for progressive issues(and 11 hours of testimony in front of a Republican-ledcommittee):
We can’t afford another major ground war inthe Middle East—that's exactly what ISIS
We can't allow terrorists to intimidate us intoabandoning our values—that's not who we are as Americans.We're better than that.
We're not at war with a religion; we're at warwith radical jihadism. Muslim Americans: This is your countrytoo.
Reason #88: The NRA has never helped Hillaryget elected. hrc.io/reasons
We should prioritize American families over thegun lobby—period.
Presidents have to be ready to tackle any issuethat comes to their desk. hrc.io/reasons
We want a fair race. Let's get back to theissues the American people care about.
Reason 3 of many why Hillary should be ournext president. hrc.io/reasons
America needs a president who can both keepour families safe and make the economy work for everyone,not just those at the top.
112 reasons (and counting) why Hillary shouldbe our next president: hrc.io/reasons
For the facts during tonight's #DemDebate,follow
If you agree Hillary is the president we need,tell us why you're standing with her:
"I think Hillary will go down as one of the finestsecretaries of state we’ve had." —President
is THE candidate for New Hampshire.
To keep America safe, we need leaders whowill stand up against hateful
whochecked something off my Christmas list this year. #HillaryForTheHolidays
Our values set us apart. Now is not the time toabandon
Captain Humayun Khan was an immigrant andan American hero. This is his
Hillary's videographer on what it's like to followher around the country with a camera:
We are Americans. We will not turn on eachother or our
called for last montht.co/hmF6xDKwbP

Those at the top are doing just fine. It’s yourfamily that needs a raise.
Discrimination against LGBT people goesagainst everything we stand for as a
absolutely slayed it nerd style withher Snapchat today! #ImWithHer#StarWarsTheForceAwakens
This year, Republicans reminded us that theDark Side is alive and well.
To keep America safe, we need leaders whowill stand up against hateful proposals and reckless
The Buffett Rule says millionaires should paymore of what they can afford in taxes. Hillary will make surethey do.
Congrats on a magnificent career, Abby. Lookforward to cheering on @ussoccer_wnt with you this summer!#ThanksAbby
Hillary on that feeling when you realize yourdaughter is starting to sound like
Are Republicans stealing policy ideas from"The Princess Bride"?
How this teen became the first openlytransgender elected official in her state:
Need another reason to be upset withRepublican candidates? As you wish:
The immigrant story is America's story. That'swhy we need a real pathway to citizenship.
.@MalalaFund is right: we cannot tolerateTrump’s hateful speech against
Seven reasons the world is a better placebecause Hillary was secretary of state:
Shallow slogans and chest-beating don’t addup to a strategy for defeating terrorism and keeping Americasafe.
Hillary wants to fix our immigration system sowe can keep families
We can’t afford another major ground war inthe Middle East—that's exactly what ISIS
We cannot let Trump or any of the Republicancandidates win the White House. Add your name if you
We are Americans. We will not turn on eachother or our principles. That's how we win.
We're better than this.
The candidates on stage talk tough—but theywon't even support legislation preventing suspected terroristsfrom getting guns.
Solo un candidato en esta elección sabe cómotrabajar con otros países para mantenernos seguros—ellatiene la experiencia.
A reminder of what a presidential candidatewith real foreign policy experience looks like ⬇️ #GOPdebate
Only one candidate in this election knows howto build coalitions and make the world safer—because she'sdone it.
This election is about keeping Americanfamilies safe and strong. The ideas we're hearing fromRepublicans won't do that.
We cannot let the Republicans win the WhiteHouse. Text 2016 to 47246 if you agree.
There's too much at stake to let Republicanstake us backwards.
No estamos en guerra contra una religion.Estamos en guerra contra el yihadismo radical. Hillaryentiende la diferencia.
We're not at war with a religion. We're at warwith radical jihadism. Hillary knows the
We need serious leadership to keep us safe.Hateful words and extreme proposals that go against ourvalues aren't serious.
Palabras odiosas y propuestas extremas vanen contra de nuestros valores. Necesitamos liderazgo
To keep America safe, we need real leadership—not hateful rhetoric.
Shallow slogans don’t add up to a strategy.#GOPdebate
Meet 7 Republican candidates who are totallyunprepared to be commander-in-chief:
Who said it: Trump or not Trump? Text QUIZto 47246 to take the
Here’s what you need to know about Hillary’splan to keep America safe:
Waging and winning the fight against ISIS willrequire serious
@lenadunham Here's one
@lorellapraeli I'm so proud to call you myfellow citizen. ¡Felicitaciones!
We need a leader who will keep America safeand secure. Add your name if you agree:
"Americans will not buckle or break. We willnot turn on each other or turn on our principles."
"To all our Muslim American brothers andsisters: This is your country too. And I am proud to be yourfellow American."
"I have this old fashioned idea that we elect apresident to keep us safe...I’m not going to let the gun lobbytell me that’s not
"I have news for [Republicans]—terrorists useguns to kill Americans. I think we should make it harder forthem from to do that."
"It defies common sense that Republicans inCongress refuse to make it harder for potential terrorists tobuy guns."
"We cannot allow terrorists to intimidate usinto abandoning our values...that is not who we are asAmericans. We are better than
seesthe big picture - taking on not just ISIS but also the broaderradical jihadist movement. -
We can't sit idly by while Republicans shameand blame women, demonize immigrants, and say climatechange isn't
is committedto the fight for full LGBT equality.
This is what it would be like for a formersecretary of state to be president:
in Iowa thisFebruary. Families like mine need a fighter. More on why here--&gt;
It’s a fact: The economy does better with aDemocrat in the White House.
Trump no es el único Republicano conopiniones ofensivas.
on Mon for kickoff #LGBTforHillary call.Sign up
knowswe're #StillFighting for full LGBT equality.
"I don't think I have ever met someone moreprepared to be president." —@Madeleine Albright on
knowswe're #StillFighting for full LGBT equality.
#LGBTForHillary
"Even though marriage equality is now legalnationwide, I’m still fighting." —@JimObergefell
We are #StillFighting to ensure thattransgender people are treated with the equal rights anddignity they
Text THROWBACK to 47246 to receive anever-before-seen photo of Hillary:
A Republican president could nominate asmany as four Supreme Court justices. Why that should terrifyyou:
Keeping our families and communities safeshouldn’t be
Secretary of state, presidential candidate,Grammy winner. More surprising facts about Hillary
"Too many people think that the fight for LGBTrights ended with marriage equality."
Sometimes a grandma needs to make a pitstop to shop for her
Hillary's statement on the Paris climate changeagreement:
The Paris climate agreement is an historicstep. We don't have to choose between economic growth&amp; protecting our planet—we can do both.
If you agree, add your name:
A four-decade career in public service, by thenumbers:
Meet a 9/11 responder whose health benefitsare being threatened by Republicans:
.@LateNightSeth asks: What would make@billclinton a great first gentleman? Watch Hillary's
If your paycheck doesn’t stretch as far as itused to, you’re not alone.
Hillary and @LateNightSeth talk gun violenceprevention: “We can sure do a better job than we're doingnow.”
On the set of @broadcity season 3 with@abbijacobson, @ilazer and Amy!
Symbols of hate create more hate. It's time forthe Confederate flag to come down at The Citadel. -H
call. Sign up to
really think ofDonald Trump? t.co/x0sQcx8jeD #LNSM
Hillary's on @LateNightSeth
#tbt Snapchat game isSTRONG #ImWithHer
Hillary never backs down from a tough fight—even if it's with some of the worst human rights offenders inthe world.
What's at stake at the Supreme Court if aRepublican is elected president (hint: a lot):
"Why are you running for president?" "Because I want to help little
Can’t wait!
Tell @SenateMajLdr to bring a vote on the#ZadrogaAct for 9/11 responders. Their sacrifice deserves ourcommitment to their health.
It wasn’t always pantsuits and presidentialraces. Some of Hillary's best #TBT moments:
Last chance! Tonight's the deadline forChristmas delivery. Browse the holiday gift guide:hrc.io/giftguide
oversaw first comprehensivestrategy to combat gender-based violence at @StateDeptt.co/GWqjO9S0Va
12 things you can learn from Hillary'sthrowback photos. #TBT
American workers shouldn’t have to shoulderthe burden of corporate tax breaks.
Today, Germany’s first woman chancellor,Angela Merkel, was named @TIME's Person of the Year.#TimePOY
Families need to focus on caring for their lovedones—not paying for health
.@Glassdoor’s ‘Best places to work’ have onebig thing in common–and it’s not just free coffee.
No one—including Martin Shkreli—should havethe power to price gouge American families.
Nearly 3 million Americans are Muslims. Theydeserve better than Republicans’ hateful, dangerous
Take the quiz! Who said the shameful,dangerous, and extreme quote: Donald Trump or anotherRepublican?
Donald Trump’s anti-Muslim proposal isextreme—but not by the standards of the rest of the 2016Republican field.
#EveryStudentSucceeds is a critical step togiving all children a quality education. Let's work to ensure itlives up to its name.
Take the “Trump or Not Trump” quiz—even ifyou get every answer right, America still
"What you’re hearing from Trump and otherRepublicans is absolutely, unequivocally wrong." ReadHillary's letter:
If you agree that #LoveTrumpsHate, text LOVEto 47246 to get the
Muslim Americans: This is your country, too.I’m proud to be your fellow American. And many, many otherAmericans feel the same way.
El pueblo Venezolano ha hablado.
Stick it to Trump with the official#LoveTrumpsHate sticker.
Enough of the shameful, dangerous anti-Muslim rhetoric from Republicans. Hillary
Jon Stewart returned to @TheDailyShow tostand up for a cause that a lot of New Yorkers—andAmericans—care about:
Trump’s hateful comments aren’t just anaffront to our values—they’re a threat to our national
Tell Donald Trump: Hate is not an Americanvalue.
in the @NYTimes: "How I'dRein in Wall Street" t.co/FcNeUx6Ong
snapchat account isamazing
On this day in 1993, Toni Morrison became thefirst African American woman to accept the @NobelPrize inLiterature.
Declaring war on Islam or demonizing MuslimAmericans is not only counter to our values—it plays right intothe hands of
"Americans now have to move from fear toresolve." Hillary on her plan to defeat ISIS:
Every Republican senator running for presidentvoted against making it harder for suspected terrorists to buyguns.
Hillary's new plan &amp; exit tax will ensurecompanies like Pfizer can’t leave the US to avoid paying theirfair share.
The US women's soccer team faces unequaltreatment in playing surfaces and pay—but they're not
En un paso democrático, el pueblo venezolanovotó por el cambio. Estamos con el pueblo
This is reprehensible, prejudiced and divisive.@RealDonaldTrump, you don't get it. This makes us less safe.-H
You know Hillary's a candidate—but did youknow she's also a #Grammys winner? More things you neverknew about her:
Need some motivation this afternoon? FollowHillary’s lead: hrc.io/1RAsrjA
#HourOfCode inspires millions of students,especially girls, to learn to code. Excited to see what they'llcreate.
On the date that will live forever in infamy, wehonor the sacrifice and courage of all who bravely fought anddied at
Our goal must not be to deter or contain ISIS.Our goal must be to defeat ISIS.
is right to fight GOP effortsto sneak financial reform rollbacks into the funding
If the GOP wants to put our economy at risk tohelp Wall St, we should be ready to fight back and win. Myop-ed: hrc.io/1TvxnVg
Just 11 words from Hillary sent this powerfulmessage of equality around the world.
Warm wishes to everyone celebratingHanukkah. May the miracle at the center of the Festival ofLights bring you courage and hope.
Thrilled to have you on Team Hillary,@ricky_martin. ¡Muchas
7 proud feminists who aren't
Hillary has always stood with PlannedParenthood—and always will. #StandWithPP
Proud to stand for quality, affordable healthcare. Proud to #StandWithPP.
In the face of unconscionable attacks, weshould all #StandWithPP—and against hateful rhetoric andviolence.
Heartbroken for the victims' families and ourfriends at @seiu. -H
A girl-power playlist in honor of “Waitress”—amusical that’s about to make Broadway history:
"Progressives believe in making progress,which is why I'm proud to endorse Hillary Clinton." Thanks,@LaborSec.
Every Republican senator running for presidentvoted against making it harder for suspected terrorists to geta gun.
It’s not complicated: If you are too dangerousto fly in America, you are too dangerous to buy a gun inAmerica.
This should be common sense—yetRepublican senators blocked a bill to stop suspectedterrorists from buying
Hillary's plan to repair roads, expand internetaccess, and create jobs is a “down payment on America’sfuture":
forPresident. Toughness, strength, intelligence, and experience.Our statement:
Women and girls can stand straighter andspeak louder because of the examples set by these artists:hrc.io/1TAUH4E
Now the most qualified can serve in anymilitary role, regardless of gender—as it should be. -H
Americans with disabilities are leaders in everycorner of our society. I salute their contributions to ourcountry on #IDPD.
Women deserve access to the health care theyneed—without interference, intimidation, or violence.#StandWithPP -H
Love this message from @goldieblox: Fromrunning the field to running the world, girls can do anything.hrc.io/1PA4QQu
Our roads, bridges, and airports are in a sorrystate. Hillary will invest in the infrastructure America
"If you are too dangerous to fly in America, youare too dangerous to buy a gun in America."
“We cannot go on with losing 90 people a dayto gun violence...We need to take action now.”
"No matter what motivation these shootershad, we can say one thing for certain—they shouldn’t havebeen able to do this."
I refuse to accept this as normal. We must takeaction to stop gun violence now.
Families pay over $500 per year on carmaintenance because of deteriorating roads. We need toinvest in our
Hillary talked health care, being agrandmother, and more on @Quora:
Hillary’s tribute to Rosa Parks in Montgomery,Alabama today:
Ted Cruz says no one is trying to bancontraception. Here are five times he tried to do *exactly*
.@SenatorBarb: U. R. The.
your snapchat story isincredible today. Thanks for calling out the
will reassure theworld the US will honor our commitments in
What would a woman president mean to littlegirls? This.
.@Quora asked: Why will being a grandmothermake Hillary a better president? Read Hillary's
"We need to put a limit on what Americans arepaying out-of-pocket for their medications." Hillary on@Quora →
"Attacking Planned Parenthood is part of aconcerted effort to roll back women’s access to health care."—Hillary
"I want to build on the progress we’ve madeunder the Affordable Care Act." Hillary on
Hillary just joined @Quora! Check out heranswers on health care, Planned Parenthood, and being agrandma:
History often gets made on ordinary days byseemingly ordinary people—December 1, 1955 was one ofthem. Thank you, Rosa Parks.
These little girls have a message for America:When it comes to presidents, “44 boys is too
On this day in 1955, Rosa Parks’ act ofrebellion on a Montgomery bus sparked a national movementfor equal rights.
As Secretary of State, Hillary worked toimprove global health and set the stage for an AIDS-freegeneration.
Let's commit to an AIDS-free generation:invest in research, fight discrimination, and expand access tolifesaving drugs. #WorldAIDSDay
Parts of our air traffic control system date toWorld War II. We invented airplanes; we are the reason theworld can fly. We can do
Investing in our infrastructure is about morethan creating good jobs: it’s about maintaining our status asthe world’s economic
China is investing $180 billion to expandbroadband internet access. We cannot be left
“I want us once again to think big and look up,beyond the horizon, about what’s possible in
Thanks to this loophole, people who wouldn'tpass an FBI background check have been able to get gunsanyway.
Climate change deniers and obstructionistsshould know—their cynical efforts will fail.
has put forth the best (and only) plan to defeatISIS so far
Gifts for everyone on your list, from the capital-F Feminist to the cocktail enthusiast.
Una historia de amor.
will fight to ensurethat climate change remains a priority on the internationalstage. #COP21
Free shipping on orders of $75 or more at the2016 shop! #CyberMonday
We should be supporting Planned Parenthood—not attacking it.
at tonight's
at #JJdinner #fitn
speaking at the@NHDems #JJdinner t.co/7NKRyep7Ul
10 members of the @SenateDems “girls’ club”came together to talk about why they’re supporting HillaryClinton:
Agreed! (via
What did her mom say when Hillary thought@Wellesley was too hard? The best advice she could havegotten.
Some of Hillary's favorite family-ownedbusinesses on the campaign trail:
From Olivia, age 12: “I am a little feministgrowing up to help all women with equal rights.” Read herletter ⬇
Hillary Rodham and Bill Clinton met at lawschool—and she made the first move.
Hillary's known the importance of smallbusinesses ever since her dad owned
Support small businesses today! They are thebackbone of our economy and represent the best of Americaningenuity.
Today and every day, we
How did Hillary and @billclinton feel aboutdropping @ChelseaClinton off at college? “We were bothwrecks.”
Our diversity should be celebrated—notdenigrated.
"She has a light and energy about her thatmakes you want to be your best." @OITNB’s @UzoAduba andDascha Polanco
So much to be thankful for. Wishing a happyThanksgiving to you and yours.
We're thankful for our official campaignsupporters. Add your name to become one!
Senior policy advisor @mayaharris_ talks#BlackLivesMatter and being a working mom with@ELLEmagazine:
From Hillary’s record to whether she wears awig(?!), @creynoldsnc has your back for awkward familypolitical talk.
Sign up and we’ll send you a guide to winningyour Thanksgiving table debate:
Statement of Hillary Clinton on the shooting ofLaquan
En un chat Telemundo por la web, Hillary hablóde Donald Trump, la educación, y los tacos.
There’s no place for second-class status in theUnited States of
Hillary answers: What’s it like to watch footballwith your family?
From immigration to education, Trump totacos: Hillary’s Q&amp;A with @TelemundoNews
Politicians have no right to interfere withwomen's access to health care—not in Texas, not
Today, @POTUS awards Shirley Chisholm, thefirst African American congresswoman, with
Latinas no deberían ganar 56 centavos porcada dólar que gana un hombre anglosajón.
is focused on empowering thisnation economically by building the middle class out" —@CoryBooker
Take an in-depth look at Hillary's plan todefeat ISIS with the campaign's foreign policy expert,@rosenbergerlm:
This feminist dad is making sure nothingstands in the way of his daughters’ success. Read his letter tothem:
has remained committed to helpingour #veterans.
Caregiving for elderly and disabled familymembers in the US in 2013 was estimated to be worth $470billion. Caregivers deserve our
Every survivor of sexual assault deserves to beheard, believed, and supported.
Important words from someone who foundrefuge in America:
With a GOP majority in Congress, how willHillary pass laws? See her response to this Q from an astuteyoung lady.
How will Hillary’s college plan help you? Findout with this flowchart:
We need to protect our communities from thescourge of gun violence. Thank you,
It's snowing in Iowa right now—and organizersand volunteers are still knocking on doors for
"Who would you pick to play you in a movie?"–@kellyripa "Well, Meryl Streep of course!"
has filed torun in SC #HRCinSC
Our values are stronger than fear. Slammingthe door on refugees isn’t who we
was able to attend her birthday party onChristmas #HRCinSC
Louisiana: Today is Election Day! Text VOTE to47246 to find your polling place—then go make your
We’re better than
Have you ever met a president? RSVP todayfor a chance to meet President @billclinton!
DAPA would keep millions of law-abidingfamilies together—and its fate is in the hands of the nextpresident.
and collecting #commit2caucuscards. #HRCanvass
We need to say with one voice thattransgender people are valued, loved, and deserve to betreated that way.
wants to pass #CIR, butuntil then will fight for DAPA and go further. Republicanswould end it.
I will fight for DAPA so millions of childrenwon't fear coming home to empty houses. Strengtheningfamilies means keeping them together.
Today, @CoryBooker joins @HillaryforSC for aTwitter chat about what's at stake in this election. Join in→#CoryinSC
This is shocking rhetoric. It should bedenounced by all seeking to lead this country. -H
No one working full-time in America shouldhave to raise their kids in
.@KellyandMichael asked Hillary: What do youthink would be some of the advantages of having a womanpresident?
Hillary Clinton called out Republicans forslamming the door on Syrian refugees: “We’re better thanthat.”
and I have in common? Lastminute shopping for dresses to get married in, among otherthings
When workers organize for their rights, it helpsfix our unbalanced economy and makes families
Did you miss Hillary’s big speech oncombating terrorism? Here are 3 things you should
Turning away orphans, discriminating againstMuslims, slamming the door on Syrian refugees—that is notwho we are.
Hillary on confronting an ideology of
points out that we shouldn't have one for ourcompassion.
addressing the full spectrumof threat: foreign, domestic, law enforcement, going dark,radicalization. She really gets
"This is not a time for scoring political points...This is a time for American leadership." —Hillary on defeatingISIS &amp; the refugee
"It would be a cruel irony indeed if ISIS canforce families from their homes &amp; then also prevent themfrom ever finding new ones."
"Remember: many of these Syrian refugeesare fleeing the same terrorists who threaten us."
"Turning away orphans, applying a religioustest, discriminating against Muslims...that’s just not who weare. We’re better than
"We cannot allow terrorists to intimidate usinto abandoning our values and our humanitarian
"We are in a contest of ideas against anideology of hate—and we have to win."
"Repeating the specific words 'radical Islamicterrorism' is just a distraction...Our priority should be how tofight the enemy."
"Let’s be clear: Islam is not our adversary.Muslims are peaceful and tolerant people and have nothingwhatsoever to do with
speech today the moststrategic+comprehensive of any American leader on ISIS andburning Middle
"This is a worldwide fight—and America mustlead it." —Hillary on defeating radical
"Our goal is not to deter or contain ISIS, but todefeat and destroy ISIS."
We "can’t sacrifice our values or turn ourbacks on those in need. We must choose resolve—and wemust lead the world to meet this
"After a major terrorist attack, every societyfaces a choice between fear and resolve."
Happening now: Hillary lays out her plan tocombat terrorism and defeat ISIS. Watch →
The deck is stacked for the wealthiestAmericans—and it’s time to
The wealthy should not be the only onesrewarded for our country's
The defining economic challenge of our time israising incomes for hardworking families so they can affordeveryday
The loss of lives to terrorism is tragic andabhorrent, in Nigeria as in Europe. We must all come togetherto end this scourge.
After the events in Paris and with thousands ofgun deaths in the US each year, hard to fathom this from theGOP. hrc.io/1OfSwkX
.@billclinton popped the question three timesbefore Hillary said yes. How she remembers the proposal thatworked:
Born on this day in 1945, Wilma Mankiller wasthe first woman elected chief of the
Proud to have @SEIU on this team.hrc.io/1LkJb6N
Hillary is proud to be a champion for workers,and honored to stand with
The Affordable Care Act helps millions ofAmericans. We should build on that progress—not go back tosquare one.
If you like puppies, dancing, and calling outRepublicans, you'll love the hillaryclinton
51% of the kids in our public schools areeligible for free or reduced cost lunches. We need to raisewages to lift families out of
has a track record of fighting 4healthcare access, good jobs, &amp; equal access 2education 4 working families
realiza evento de campaña enDallas, Texas. Puedes verlo en vivo aquí: t.co/GwJhZWy8zOvia
The @SEIU, representing 2 million workers, hasvoted to endorse
We've seen a lot of hateful rhetoric from theGOP. But the idea that we'd turn away refugees because ofreligion is a new low.
Thank you, @SEIU.
supports our movementto build a better future for working families.
Hillary and her supporters take a lot of selfies—and she’s learned a few things along the
Come for the coffee. Stay for the conversation—about one of this campaign's most important issues. ☕️
“It shows her at her wonkish best."hrc.io/WallSt
We asked Senator @clairecmc what aRepublican president would mean for women.
No American should work full-time andstruggle to get by. Raising the minimum wage will help liftmillions out of
Thank you, @JimObergefell. Our work isn’tover yet.
7 of Hillary's best moments at the#DemDebate, including one line every little girl should
"Our prayers are with the people of Francetonight, but that is not enough." —Hillary
"I’m very proud that...a majority of my donorsare women." —Hillary at the
Hillary summed up one of the most importantissues of this election at the #DemDebate.
Girl Scouts stick together.
and @ArkRazorbacks.
Are you ready for the first woman president?#DemDebate
El trabajo de un presidente o una presidenta eshacer todo lo posible para que todos puedan salir adelante.—Hillary
Want Hillary's first thoughts after the#DemDebate? Text ImWithHer now to 47246 to get amessage from
Stand with Hillary and sign up to get a free#ImWithHer sticker in the mail:
tonight, in one word:
"I think the president's job is to do everythingpossible—everything she can do—to lift up the people of thiscountry." —Hillary
For too long, issues affecting women andfamilies—from childcare to paid leave—have been dismissedas "women's issues." Those days are
La reforma de salud es demasiado importantepara ser revocada.
"The Affordable Care Act—I don't think weshould have to be defending it among Democrats."
We must make community colleges tuition-freeacross America.
What Hillary believes: No American shouldhave to take out a loan to pay tuition at a public
It's 2015. Every woman deserves equal pay.Full stop.
"President Obama deserves more credit thanhe gets for what he got done." —Hillary
has thebest vision and ideas to move us forward and keep us
We cannot accept 33,000 gun deaths per yearas “normal.” Most Americans—including law-abiding gunowners—believe we can and must do
believes it's time to act ongun violence—and she has a plan to do it.
Hay que hacer todo lo posible para detener laviolencia con armas de fuego sin importar lo que diga el
There have been approximately 2,800 gundeaths since the last #DemDebate one month ago. We can'twait any longer to act on gun
We cannot give up on preventing gun violence.We—and our next president—have to stand up to the NRA.#DemDebate
Gun dealers and manufacturers should be heldaccountable when they endanger communities.
"My plan is tougher and more effectivebecause I go after all of Wall Street—not just the big banks."—Hillary
We need to rein in risk on Wall Street, andmake sure middle class American families never have to bail itout again.
Como presidenta, Hillary protegerá, renovará,y expandirá DACA y DAPA, las órdenes ejecutivas. No creeen separar a las familias.
Hillary will fight to protect DACA/DAPA, passcomprehensive immigration reform, and keep familiestogether.
Hillary will defend President Obama’sexecutive actions on immigration—and if Congress refuses toact, do everything possible to go
There is no place in America for second-classcitizenship. Hard-working immigrant families deserve a pathto full and equal
Hillary on the terror attacks in Paris at the#DemDebate:
We should build on the progress we've madeon health care—not go back to square one.
We should make the tax system fairer: closeloopholes for Wall Street money managers and millionairesand give the middle class a tax
A higher minimum wage will help close the paygap, help lift millions of women out of poverty, and have aripple effect across our
Nuestro desafío como país no solo es ayudar aaquellos que trabajan duro, pero también asegurar que todospuedan salir adelante.
--&gt; hillaryclinton.com
"Hardworking middle class families need araise—not a tax increase." —Hillary
If you're not watching the #DemDebate, wecan email you the highlights! Sign up here:
"We're not at war with Islam…we’re at warwith violent extremism." —Hillary
America must continue to lead in a dangerousworld—and we do so by exercising smart leadershipgrounded firmly in our values.
Esta elección no solo se trata de elegir a unpresidente—también se trata de elegir a un comandante enjefe. —Hillary
"We have to look at ISIS as the leading threatof an international network. It cannot be contained—it mustbe defeated." —Hillary
"All of the other issues we want to deal withdepend on our country being secure and strong."
"This election is not only about choosing apresident—it's also about choosing our next Commander-in-chief." —Hillary
"Our prayers are with the people of Francetonight but that is not enough." —Hillary
Send Hillary a message of support as sheheads into the #DemDebate:
"Even after this darkest night, Paris remainsthe City of
The reports from Paris are harrowing. Prayingfor the city and families of the victims.
Follow #Hillary2016 campaign staff to stay inthe know during tomorrow’s
A five-star review from a four-star general.Thank you,
Proud of my friend Aung San Suu Kyi and thepeople of Burma for never giving up in the long struggle tobring change to their country.
shows she is a smart anddecisive leader.
The story of 2 women with moms namedDorothy, sharing beers of the same name, toasting to the firstwoman president.
That time Donald Trump gushed about one ofthe most shameful periods in our country’s
#TBT to when Hillary declared she’s not *just*a progressive at last month’s Democratic
C'mon Nevada lets go#100toCaucus .@HillaryforNV Credit:Ernesto and
We've come too far to see our progress
Create your own #Hillary2016–inspired cross-stitch. Here’s the pattern to DIY:
The U.S. economy would have produced anadditional $447.6 billion in 2013 if women received equal
stand in solidaritywith #ConcernedStudent1950
We need to keep guns out of the hands ofdomestic abusers and convicted stalkers.
thinks its time to act#ImWithHer
In 1991 Hillary Clinton filed her husband'spapers to run for president. In 2015 she filed her
.@Bustle: "6 Feminist Points In Hillary Clinton'sVeterans Plan That Are Awesomely Inclusive"
Being a good parent has nothing to do withsexual orientation—thousands of families prove
Mentions of Hillary at #GOPdebate: Over 40.Mentions of equal pay, paid leave, LGBT rights, or racialjustice: 0.
Our veterans have done so much for us; nowwe need to do more for them. Read Hillary’s op-ed in the@MilitaryTimes:
“To all our veterans, and the men and womennow serving: You represent the very best that our country hasto offer.”
What those who served and sacrificed wantyou to know this Veterans Day:
La idea de que vamos a deportar a 11milliones de personas es absurda, inhumana y va en contrade nuestros valores. De ninguna manera
The idea of tracking down and deporting 11million people is absurd, inhumane, and un-American. No,Trump. -H
And if anything's clear from last night's#GOPdebate: "They don't have a plan—they just hate mine."@Lin_Manuel
is the onlycandidate who can reach across the aisle to serve #Veteranslike me. She did as Senator. She will
On Veterans Day, to all who have served—youdeserve our gratitude, respect, and the best care and benefitsin the world.
The "winners" from last night's #GOPDebate:hrc.io/1kMuILu
If you're proud to be a Democrat afterwatching tonight's #GOPdebate, add your name
Apoyar a las familias incluye la baja dematernidad pagada, aumentar el salario mínimo, y acceso aguarderías infantiles.
The @CFPB protects borrowers from unfairand deceptive Wall Street practices. Attacks against it areunfounded and
What’s really pro-family: Supporting equal pay,paid leave, affordable child care, and Planned
These candidates don't seem to mind a "biggovernment" when it's politicians interfering in women'spersonal health decisions.
#GOPdebate translation: Doubling down ontrickle-down economics. America needs an economy thatworks for
For 35 years, Republicans have argued thatmore wealth at the top will trickle down—and twice, aDemocrat has had to clean up the
Republicans who want to repeal the ACAshould try telling that to the 18 million people who have healthcoverage because of it.
Note to candidates who boast that they'drepeal Obamacare: Health care should be a right—not just aprivilege for those who can afford
Más posturas absurdas del PartidoReTrumplicano—no vamos a deportar a 11 milliones depersonas. No vamos a separar a familias.
The idea that the US will deport 11 millionpeople is absurd. We should not be in the business of tearingfamilies apart.
Comprehensive immigration reform that bringsmillions of hardworking people out of the shadows and intothe economy: A policy
It's hard to declare a "winner" in the#GOPDebate when every candidate is trying to move ourcountry backward.
There is something wrong when top CEOsmake 300x more than the typical worker.
How do we get more in the workforce? Paidleave, equal pay, child care—won't hear that fromRepublicans. hillaryclinton.com/plan
President Obama doesn't get the credit hedeserves for strengthening our economy. We need to build onthat progress, not go
.@JohnKasich is right on one thing: The budgetwas balanced under President Bill Clinton.
Millionaires don't need tax breaks. Middleclass Americans do.
An idea you won't hear at the #GOPdebate: Ifyou work hard, you should be able to succeed—no matterwho you are or where you come
Two fewer candidates, but the same number ofnew ideas as the last #GOPdebate:
Republicans have it wrong on many issuesfacing Americans this election. Tell us: What are you fightingfor?
@HillaryforSC My little guy isstill blushing from ear to ear. Even more so after seeing this.
Every woman deserves to make her owndecisions about birth control—without interference frompoliticians or her boss.
Hillary’s dad prepared thousands of sailorsduring WWII—after he died, Hillary received letters from menhe trained.
Celebrating 240 years of @USMC service andsacrifice, from Tun Tavern to Helmand. Happy
Hillary’s veterans plan will “ensure access totimely, high quality health care and modernize veterans’benefits.”
Vets deserve better. My plan will addressissues like this by upgrading VA technology &amp; requiringaccountability. hrc.io/1QrXqNZ
La Corte del 5to Circuito se equivocó. La CorteSuprema tiene que validar a DACA/DAPA para que millonesde familias puedan vivir sin
The 5th Circuit is wrong on immigration.SCOTUS should uphold DACA/DAPA so millions of familiescan stop living in fear.
on fixing the VA: "This won'tbe a photo op for me. This will be an every day
live with the@TrumanProject for a roundtable for #veterans and#militaryfamilies:
Happy Diwali! Wishing a bright year ahead toall celebrating the Festival of
“The future that scientists have warned usabout has arrived.” —Hillary to
Fast-food, home care, child care workers: Youradvocacy is changing our country for the better. #Fightfor15
America must lead the world in developing anddeploying new clean energy sources that will power
2015 is on track to be the hottest year onrecord. Climate change is not only real, it's already
This ice cream shop named a sundae afterHillary Clinton. But that’s only part of the
"Why are you running for president?" "Because I want to help little
“When things get tough, Hillary does not backdown.” —@repjohnlewis
on fighting #climatechange atLCVAF's
at LCVAF's endorsement,happening
“When it comes to fighting the climate crisis,the stakes couldn’t be higher.” —@LCVoters
Yet another Republican refuses to make iteasier to vote. What part of democracy are they so afraid of? -H
files her candidacy in the #FITN
to file forcandidacy here in Concord!
today becauseshe will combat #ClimateChange head on
Women shouldn’t make less than men in 2015.Period.
What would it mean to have a former secretaryof state in the White House? This.
Today marks one year from the presidentialelection. Here’s what’s at stake, in one terrifying flow
Tune in to @newsone Monday morning at 7 ETfor more from Hillary’s South Carolina town hall with@rolandsmartin:
We quantified Hillary’s career—take a look atthe numbers.
“This has to end.” Hillary on gun violence atthe First in the South Democratic Candidates
Ten women senators say why they’resupporting one of their own:
A young man asked Hillary: What did you learnfrom @GirlScouts that you would use to be a successfulpresident?
“I helped launch African Americans for Hillary.This is my story.” -@KarenCivil
“It’s hard for me to understand why thesuspension and expulsion rate is so much higher for blackkids.” —Hillary
Watch live: Hillary joins @RolandMartin for the@NewsOne Town Hall in South Carolina #NewsOneNow
Follow @HillaryforSC for updates on Hillary’strip to the Palmetto State and today’s @newsone town hall:hrc.io/1Qazv6G
Hillary Clinton sat down with the mothers ofEric Garner and Dontre Hamilton—here’s what they talkedabout:
Si tuviera que aprender un idioma, Hillary dijoque sería el idioma de Gabriel García Márquez.
"If you stand for equal rights, if you standagainst discrimination, you don't just do it once—you've gotto keep fighting."
On foreign policy, the use of force "shouldalways be the last resort—not the first choice."
We can't wait any longer to act on gunviolence prevention.
"It is hard to understand why the suspensionand expulsion rate is so much higher for black kids than forwhite kids."
"Anybody who thinks that they can influencewhat I will do doesn't know me very well."
to RachelMaddow
"Pres. Obama doesn't get the credit hedeserves for the job he's done...I want to build on thatprogress—but I want to go further."
tonight #HRCinSC
The right call. Now it's time to make America aclean energy superpower.
.@MikeyLikesItNY helps people with criminalrecords find jobs, one scoop at a time.
Hillary is ready to be president. Want to helpmake it happen? Apply to be a Hillary for America
What do you call the male spouse of a femalepresident? Hillary and @JimmyKimmel have some
Hillary’s spent 40 years in public service, andthe numbers speak for themselves.
snapchat ismaking me all emotional. #Hillary2016 #Empowerment#HillYes
Today on @Snapchat: 10 little girls who areready for the first woman president. Follow us! hillaryclinton
Backstage at @JimmyKimmelLive—tune intonight!
#TBT to the time Hillary had a @DollyParton-themed birthday party in 1995.
Working hand in hand with tribal nations, theUS government can help ensure the strength of Nativecommunities.
on #KimmelTONIGHT!
50 years ago, @repjohnlewis marched—andbled—for the right to vote. His message today: “We must usethe vote.”
Malala is brave, inspiring—and really ontosomething here. hrc.io/1HuCv5H (via
Our criminal justice system is broken. Here are3 things we can do to start fixing it:
Meet Olivia, the 12-year-old feminist whowrote Hillary this letter:
We can't sit by while more people die. It's timeto stand up to the NRA once and for
A 10% price reduction is insulting. As I've saidbefore, the FDA and FTC need to step in to protectconsumers. hrc.io/1kbDD9r
Guilty as charged.
We should not put 650,000+ promising youngpeople at risk for deportation. Sen. Rubio is wrong on this. -H
Hillary’s answer shows *exactly* what it wouldmean to have a former secretary of state in the Oval
In 1976, @BarbaraJWalters became the firstwoman co-anchor on a major
Racial profiling is demeaning, wrong, andunconstitutional. It's time to put that practice behind
Everyone deserves full and equal protectionunder the law. This is a reminder of the work still left to do.
Congrats @simone_biles, the most decoratedwoman gymnast of all time! Can’t wait to watch your nextwinning routine.
Hillary's gun violence prevention plan supportslegislation to stop convicted stalkers from possessing
Federal law doesn't prohibit convicted stalkersfrom purchasing or possessing guns.
Our criminal justice system is in crisis—but wecan start changing that now.
.@GregAbbott_TX is right about one thing:equality is one of Hillary's values. Houston—vote#YesOnProp1 today.
When unions are strong, America is strong.Thank you,
Voting is one of our most important and sacredrights. If there's an election near you today, make your voiceheard—go vote!
A 12-year-old feminist named Olivia wroteHillary this brave, heartwarming letter. Olivia 2040,
Watch our new ad—why Hillary is working toprevent gun violence:
While in Chicago discussing the way forward,another child dies from gun violence just miles away.Devastating. hrc.io/1LNhzuP
Republicans continue to play politics withfamilies who want to contribute to our economy. Eso no esliderazgo.
Grateful to spend time today with mothers whohave lost a child to violence and turned their grief into anational call to action.
Their faces say it all.
The top 25 hedge fund managers make morethan all kindergarten teachers in the US—combined. We needto fix that.
“We need to end private prisons and detentioncenters once and for all.” —Hillary in
On the day of the first Democratic debate,Hillary’s granddaughter Charlotte had a big surprise for
¡Feliz Día de los Muertos! Text LATINOS to47246 to join Latinos for
More than 1 in 100 American adults is behindbars. Here's how we can start fixing that.
"I support Hillary because Hillary supportsme." @OITNB’s @UzoAduba &amp; Dascha Polanco are onTeam Hillary.
An inside look at an issue that will shape oureconomy for years to come (yeah, it’s that
While Republicans swapped out-of-touchideas at the #GOPdebate, Hillary was live-texting herreactions.
Top CEOs earn 300 times more than thetypical American worker. That's
Thank you for the support,
“I can't stop asking myself once again: Wheredoes my community go from here?”
Happy Halloween!
More lives lost. We need sensible gun violenceprevention measures, and we need them
Republican debate-speak,
Too often, women still make less on the dollarthan men. It's time for equal pay
for Halloween
Rated “O” for out of touch and out of date: TheZombie Policies.
as special guest#HillaryinSC #sctweets
Glad to see @USArmy knocking down morebarriers to women serving on the front lines.
Add your name for the chance to party withHillary at @xtina's house in Los Angeles!
No pagarle lo mismo a las campeonas delmundo de fútbol es más injusto que ganar el mundial con "lamano de Díos."
Race still plays a role in who gets ahead andwho gets held back. Hillary will fight to change that. Join
Hillary calls to "ban the box": "People whohave paid their debt to society need to be able to find jobs,not just closed doors and
"I’m pledging to eliminate the disparity insentencing between crack and cocaine, whichdisproportionately impacts African
"We need to end private prisons. Protectingpublic safety...should never be outsourced or left tounaccountable corporations."
"We have to end the era of massincarceration."
"Racial profiling...is wrong, demeaning, doesn’tkeep us safe or help solve crimes—it’s time to put thatpractice behind us."
Happening now: Hillary kicks off AfricanAmericans for Hillary with @repjohnlewis in Atlanta! Watch
It's intolerable that black children in ourcountry feel unsafe in their own skin. A powerful reminder:hrc.io/1MZVzdP
Whether you're a teacher, an executive, or aworld-champion soccer player, you deserve equal pay. Redcard, GOP.
40 million Americans have student debt. Weneed to make college affordable once and for
We can’t afford to have a Republican in theWhite House. If you're with Hillary, add your
An estimated 1.5 million black men are missingfrom their communities because of incarceration andpremature
Everyone who works hard and does their partshould see that work reflected in a rising
Texts from Hillary, #GOPdebate
No one should face discrimination for who theyare or who they love—I support efforts for equality in Houston&amp; beyond. #HERO #YesOnProp1
Why are @OITNB’s @UzoAduba &amp;Dascha Polanco on Team Hillary? "She cares about the thingsthat are important to us."
"Do you think that when you’re president,you’ll be paid as much as a
Tonight's #GOPDebate made it clear: Wecannot afford a Republican in the White House. Get your freesticker:
Will repeat this as often as needed: Women—not the politicians on stage—should make decisions abouttheir own health.
Republicans are looking out for the wealthyand well-connected. Hillary is looking out for us.
Commercial break: Hillary wants to makecollege affordable for every American. Republicans?#GOPdebate
Every woman deserves equal pay. Period.hrc.io/1RBRU9K
Las mujeres deberían de ganar lo mismo porhacer el mismo trabajo que los hombres. Punto.
Here's what we can't afford: A Republican inthe White House. hrc.io/1RBRPCN
For people who claim to hate big government,Republicans love using it to try and make health caredecisions for women.
Text WATCH to 47246 to get live texts fromHillary during the
We need to rein in risky behavior on WallStreet. Hillary's plan: hrc.io/wallstreet
No American should have to choose betweengetting the health care they need and paying
Commercial break: Hillary is fighting for equalpay for women. Republicans are fighting against it.#GOPdebate
Los Republicanos siguen pensando que darlemás recursos a los ricos beneficiará a la clase
Here's the thing: Republicans' ideas aretrickle-down economics in disguise. We can't let them take usback to policies that don't
Millionaires don't need tax breaks. Middle-class Americans do. hrc.io/1RBRLmC
The deck has been stacked in favor of thewealthy and well-connected for too long.
La retórica ofensiva de los candidatosRepublicanos sobre los Latinos es vergonzosa y no tienelugar en la política.
Comprehensive immigration reform willstrengthen families, our economy, and our
In the past two Republican debates, no onesaid a word about equal pay. Maybe the third time's thecharm?
Which GOP candidate would you want to seeHillary take on in a debate? Cast your vote!
.@clairecmc on what a GOP president meansfor women: “June Cleaver? Would people get
We need to reauthorize the Export-ImportBank and help American businesses stay in
"If you're looking for someone to say what iswrong with America, I'm not your candidate. I think there ismore right than wrong."
"Paid family leave isn't just good for women."—Hillary at
.@StephenAtHome on "Hillary for Halloween"costume ideas: Dress up however you want, but stay for 11hours.
That feeling when you picked *just* the rightoutfit.
.@StephenAtHome: "I was playing a characterwho did not care for you." Hillary: "I can say it now—it wasmutual."
Don’t miss Hillary’s first meeting with the real@stephenathome, tonight on
Some of America's most powerful women tellus why they support Hillary:
Cosign, @POTUS.
No hay ninguna excusa para usar violencia ennuestras escuelas. Punto.
“Strong women help create strong families!”Read @katyperry’s note for Hillary's birthday:
Humorous!
just got a big endorsementfrom one of the Senate's progressive leaders. ➞t.co/XyxAuTfcIz
There is no excuse for violence inside a school.The #AssaultAtSpringValleyHigh is unacceptable—schoolsshould be safe places.
as an#adjunctprofessor &amp; proud @UFT / @AFTunion member,this status made my day! #ImWithHer
Hillary has a plan to make affordable childcarea reality—and this supporter in Alexandria, Virginia knows
Giving students a world class education alsomeans making sure adjunct faculty are paid fairly.#CampusEquityWeek
The GOP should stop trying to roll backconsumer protections—standing with @POTUS to defendmiddle class savings.
Well done, Ole Miss. Symbols of hate have nobusiness flying over a place of learning.
@JesseFFerguson you make our team betterevery day. Rest up, I'm rooting for you &amp; looking forwardto having you back 100%. #ImWithJesse
It's her birthday!
♪ ♪ Qué linda está la mañana en que vengo asaludarte, venimos todos con gusto y placer a felicitarte... ♪
Quick questions with Hillary: What familymemories still make you laugh?
Today is Hillary's birthday! Sign her card–it willmake her day:
Hillary is fighting for all of us.
.@ricky_martin tiene razón—hay que serrespetuoso y Hillary continuará demandando que losRepublicanos lo sean.
It was quite a week. Catch up on these storiesbefore you start the new one.
Highlights and behind-the-scenes momentsfrom a big day in Iowa. hrc.io/1OPTcQI
"If talking about equal pay, paid family leave,child care, &amp; women's health is playing the gender card—deal me in."
Hillary stands with parents and educators incalling for better, fairer, and fewer tests. On @usedgov's newplan:
Hillary's birthday is tomorrow—and she's stillon track to be the youngest woman US president ever. Signher card!
Happy birthday, @KatyPerry!
.@katyperry, you bring the campaign dresscode to the next level. Thanks for hanging out with us in Iowa!-H
"Go win this thing, Madam Secretary." Thanks,@davidplouffe.
Hillary and @maddow talked about everythingfrom Syria to health care—but first, Rachel was curious aboutone thing.
A roaring good time at the Iowa
Did Hillary rock at
"Together we’re going to build an Americawhere...a father can tell his daughter, 'you can be anythingyou want to be—including
"I’m listening to you. I’m fighting for you. Andwith your support, I’m going to deliver." —Hillary at
"I’ve spent my life working for children,women, families, and our country...and I’m just gettingwarmed up." —Hillary at
Why Hillary fights to prevent gun violence:"You should be safe when you go to school, when you go tothe movies, when you go to
"Yes—Black Lives Matter." —Hillary at
"When you short-change women, you short-change families and you short-change America." —Hillary onwhy she's fighting for equal pay
Hillary at the
"Companies that ship jobs and profitsoverseas shouldn’t get a tax break—you should." —Hillary
Hillary on what she's fighting for: "At the top ofthe list is this: Americans need a raise."
"As a smart man once said, there’s nothingwrong with America that can’t be fixed by what is right withAmerica." —Hillary
"It’s not enough just to rail against theRepublicans or the billionaires. We have to...make adifference in people’s lives."
Hillary at the Iowa Jefferson-Jackson dinner.#ImWithHer
"For people who claim they hate biggovernment, Republicans sure love using government to stepin and make decisions for women."
"We are going to stop Wall Street hurting MainStreet." —Hillary at the
"There is something wrong when the top 25hedge fund managers make more than all the kindergartenteachers in America combined."
"We need to defend the progress we’ve madeunder President Obama and build on it." —Hillary at
"When there’s a Democrat in the White House,America creates more jobs, the economy grows faster, anddeficits are smaller."
Hillary on the GOP debates: "It's reality TV—with a cast of characters who don't care much about actualreality."
WATCH LIVE: Hillary speaks at the IowaJefferson-Jackson dinner, 100 days before the #IAcaucus →hrc.io/iowaJJ
Live from Des Moines, Iowa: @billclinton,@KatyPerry, and team @HillaryforIA! Watch →
Thanks for following our incredible day in Iowa—stay tuned to hear @katyperry, @billclinton, and Hillary!#HillYes
SO EXCITED to see @katyperry—but while wewait, she's taking over Hillary's
Why #ImWithHer: I trust Hillary. She will makethe world better for me, my husband, and my mom.
Our Iowa motto: organize with heart, engagewith purpose, win every day. We’re definitely winning
There are people across IA doing what I doevery day: knocking on doors, making calls, and doing ourpart to win the caucus on Feb
My team has become a 2nd family. Here’s usthe day the Supreme Court legalized marriage equality—I’m inthe middle.
I organize in rural Iowa. Knocking doors heremeans driving 20 minutes between each house—but it's notall bad.
I got to introduce Hillary at an event inDubuque a few months ago—it was an experience I’ll neverforget.
As a military spouse, I stand with Hillary onnational security—&amp; she'll make sure I won't have toworry about getting fired for who I
More than anyone, Hillary knows that thedecisions she will make as President affect me and my family.#HillYes
Before Iowa, I was in NC with my husbandAaron &amp; our cat Pretzel. When Hillary announced I knew Ihad to be here.
As an organizer in Iowa, I spend my daystalking to folks in my community about Hillary and her visionfor America.
The Jefferson-Jackson Dinner is an Iowatradition. This year, it starts the 100-day countdown to thecaucus. A big night here in Des
Hi! I’m James, a @HillaryforIA organizer in NEIowa. I’ll be tweeting today ahead of the Jefferson-Jacksondinner!
it was her dream tospend her bday w/Hillary &amp; #Maddow--Patricia's bdaywas yesterday
Hillary on the stakes of this election on@maddow
Post-hearing activities: "We sat around eatingIndian food and drinking wine &amp; beer." Tune in to@maddow at 9pm
Hillary and Rachel. Tune in to @maddow at9:00 pm
@KevinMcCarthy congratulations on yourwedding tomorrow! Here's to a lifetime of happiness—andfriendlier mentions.
Anyone who’s sick of Hillary standing up forwomen had better get ready for a long
11 hours. One candidate who showed she’sready to be
Welcome to @sesamestreet, Julia! Kudos to@SesameWorkshop &amp; @autismspeaks for educatingparents &amp; kids about
A todos los que están en el paso del#HuracanPatricia, sigan @CENAPRED_mex para encontrarrefugio y más información. Pensando en
To everyone in the path of #HurricanePatricia,follow @CENAPRED_mex for shelter locations and emergencyinfo. Thinking of you—stay safe.
“I am a little feminist growing up to help allwomen with equal rights.” Meet Olivia:
"I'm running for President, because afterlistening to people across our country, your fights are myfights."
Watch live as Hillary takes the stage inAlexandria, VA with @TerryMcAuliffe →
Thanks for your support, brothers &amp;sisters of @AFSCME. You never stop fighting for workingfamilies, &amp; I'll never stop fighting for you.
good job yesterday!Respectful, honest and real as always, in spite of, well, yaknow... #Benghazi
Hillary on those who tell her to "stop shouting"on issues that
"I'm doing everything I can to make sure theissues that matter most to women and families are front andcenter in this election."
If you're proud to stand with Hillary, show theworld with your free sticker →
11 hours in → #ImWithHer
If you're standing with Hillary, let her
Hillary's email use can be summed up in foursentences: hillaryclinton.com/emails
If you're standing with Hillary today, let herknow:
As Secretary, Hillary implemented reforms toprotect diplomats and help prevent future attacks.#BenghaziCommittee
Worked to Make Diplomats Safe #benghazicommittee#lunchreads
To truly honor those lost at Benghazi, we needto do everything in our power to ensure the safety of thebrave Americans who do their
America must do all we can to protect ourpersonnel doing the important work of representing ourinterests and values around the
The work of Chris Stevens and his colleaguesrepresented the best of this approach to foreign
America must pursue a smart brand ofleadership that integrates and balances the tools ofdiplomacy, development, and
We cannot return to the go-it-alone foreignpolicy of the past, where military-based solutions are pursuedas a first
American diplomats cannot conduct their workfrom bunkers. Advancing US interests often means going tounstable
Hillary is testifying before @HouseBenghazi todefend the vision of US diplomacy that Ambassador Stevensgave his life carrying
America must continue to lead in a dangerousworld. To do otherwise would mean drawing the wrong lessonfrom the Benghazi
A lesson from Benghazi: Congress needs to doits part to ensure that our diplomats in dangerous parts of theworld are as safe as
We need leadership that puts national securityahead of politics and ideology.
Hillary this morning at the House SelectCommittee on
"The American people expect us to lead. Tolearn the right lessons. To rise above partisanship and reachfor statesmanship."
"I am here, despite all the previousinvestigations...to honor those we lost and to do what I can toaid those who serve us still."
"We should debate on the basis of fact, notfear. We should resist denigrating the patriotism or loyalty ofthose who disagree with
America "has a long history of bipartisancooperation on foreign policy...I know it’s possible to findcommon ground because I’ve done
"We need leadership at home to match ourleadership abroad. Leadership that puts national securityahead of politics and ideology."
"Efforts to establish a modern joint trainingcenter are being held up by Congress. The men and womenwho serve our country deserve
"There is more to do, and no administrationcan do it alone. Congress has to be our partner as it has beenafter previous
"I pledged that...every one [of theAccountability Review Board's recommendations] would beon the way to implementation. And they
"We have a responsibility to provide diplomatswith the resources &amp; support they need to do their jobsas safely &amp; effectively as
Hillary on fallen Americans in Libya: "Theybelieved—as I do—that America is greatest force for peace&amp; progress the world has ever
"We need creative, confident...leadership thatintegrates and balances the tools of diplomacy, development,and defense."
"Retreat from the world is not an option.America cannot shrink from our responsibility to
"We have learned the hard way when Americais absent, especially from unstable places, there areconsequences." —Hillary
"If you ask our most experiencedambassadors, they’ll tell you they can’t do their jobs for usfrom bunkers."
Hillary at the
"We inevitably must accept a level of risk toprotect our country and advance our interests and
"America must lead in a dangerous world, andour diplomats must continue representing us in dangerousplaces."
"Today I would like to share three observationsabout how we can learn from this tragedy and move forwardas a nation."
"I launched reforms to better protect ourpeople in the field and help reduce the chances of anothertragedy happening."
"I am here to honor the service of those fourmen...and the work their colleagues do every single day allover the world."
The #BenghaziCommittee explained, by@johnpodesta.
The @HouseBenghazi hearing is starting now.Follow @TheBriefing2016 for the facts you need to
This morning, Hillary testifies before@HouseBenghazi. Follow @TheBriefing2016 for fact-checksfrom the hearing.
Hillary is testifying before @HouseBenghazitoday. Here's what you need to know.
What did Hillary accomplish as Secretary ofState? @SenSchumer weighs
It’s good for our economy when companiesprosper by innovating, creating new products, and investingin workers.
Dorothy, la madre de Hillary, le enseñó laimportancia de trabajar duro y de nunca
“She was able to restore the credibility of theUnited States.” —Leon Panetta
supporters in #Nevada
As secretary of state, Hillary led theinternational negotiations that paved the way for the Iran
Take it from a fellow Secretary of State: Noone used smart power better than Hillary during her
Before Hillary was running for president,Republicans had the nicest things to say about
Hillary has the experience, skills, and vision weneed in our next Commander-in-chief. Just ask
Watch: Hillary’s diplomacy united unlikely alliesaround sanctions that got Iran to the negotiating
Former Senior Advisor to President Obama@davidaxelrod on Hillary's greatest accomplishments asSecretary of
WATCH: As Sec. of State, Hillary paved theway for the deal that will stop Iran from ever getting a nuclearweapon.
If you’re a progressive who believes in gettingthings done, sign up for your free sticker:
¡Celebración in Texas! Julián Castro endorsesHillary:
After battling it out in the primaries, Hillary gota call from President Obama to serve—and she
is calling on the FDA andFTC to investigate the guy who raised the price of daraprim to$750.
The world is a better place because Hillary wasSecretary of State. Here’s why:
Patients who rely on prescription drugs shouldnot have their health and lives put at risk because of pricegouging.
"I don't think I have ever met someone moreprepared to be president." —@Madeleine
Carly Fiorina challenged Democrats to namean accomplishment of Hillary’s. Senator @BarbaraBoxeraccepted:
Hillary has what it takes to lead America.Watch the new video on her accomplishments as Secretary ofState:
Hillary's mission as president: raise incomesfor hardworking middle-class
"What part of democracy are all thesecandidates afraid of?" Read why Hillary is fighting to protectvoting rights.
“In 2016, the Latino community is going to playa critical role in electing our next president.” -Julián
Over four decades, Hillary has taken on hershare of tough fights—here are a few of her biggestaccomplishments.
Attempting to deny citizenship to immigrants'children born here is wrong—and undermines who we are asa country. hrc.io/1LVt14z
As President, Hillary will take on the epidemicof gun violence—with or without Congress’s
What needs to change on Wall Street,according to the “Economikes.”
We can’t ignore America’s racial
is going tobe on @colbertlateshow
If you’re a progressive who believes in gettingthings done, sign up for your free sticker!
Strong step forward by @WhiteHouse. Weshouldn't put a national treasure like the Arctic at
As usual, @madeleine is right: We need tostrengthen America's leadership—not go backwards.#GrandmothersKnowBest
On Oct. 16, 1916, Planned Parenthood openedtheir first health center and changed life for women inAmerica. Here's to the next 99 years.
Yesterday in San Antonio, three-time mayor ofSan Antonio Julián Castro announced his support for
Transgender people deserve respect, safety,and equal treatment everywhere. Good move by
Brava, Jennifer. It's hard to speak up againstinequity and risk being unpopular—but equal pay matters forus all.
hosts atown hall meeting at @ksc_web in Keene, NHt.co/8OFdbCX3jb –
to#LSSC on October 27! Can't wait to find out what projectshe’s
¿Sabías que Hillary Clinton trabajó destripandopescados?
The number of American lives lost to gunviolence is more than three times the rate as the nextdeveloped country.
Me gusta ser "La Hillary," pero también soy"Tu Hillary."
¡Gracias, @JulianCastro, por tu
No puede ser que las latinas ganen enpromedio 55 centavos por cada dólar que gana un hombreblanco.
Ever had to tell a prime minister about yourbad hair day?
quotes on LGBT#equality.
#LatinaEqualPay Day represents the dayLatinas catch up to white men's earnings from last year. It'sOctober. We need equal pay for
Women still make less than men, with womenof color facing an even bigger gap. This isn't just holdingwomen back—it's holding America
We should be doing everything we can to getyoung people more engaged in our democracy, not putting upobstacles.
HQ!
To everyone who's ever been bullied for beingwho you are: You're perfect, and I'm proud of you.
is right: we need to
It's time to stand up to the NRA. We have to#KeepShoutingOnGuns until our families are safe from gunviolence.
"Yo estoy contigo. That's a promise."
"I've been told by some to quit shouting aboutthis. Well, I'll tell you: I will not be silenced...I will keep takingon the NRA."
"It is both heartbreaking and infuriating that welose an average of 90 Americans every day because of
“I'm running for president to protect ourfamilies and communities from the plague of gun
"I will fight any effort, anywhere, todisenfranchise any American." —Hillary in San
"Every American deserves access to quality,affordable health care—even new Americans."
Watch live: Hillary speaks at a Latinos forHillary event in San Antonio, Texas →
"I salute the Black Lives movement for raisingthis issue to the high priority it is."—Hillary on race andcriminal justice reform at
"We cannot grow the economy unless we endthe unequal pay that women in the workplace are stillsuffering under." —Hillary at
dijo, "Lainmigración es buena para #EEUU. La inmigración construyóeste país.
"Comprehensive immigration reform where webring people out of the shadows will be good for oureconomy."
"Immigration is good for America. Immigrationbuilt our country." —Hillary at
Watch live: Hillary speaks at @USHCC. Don'tmiss this →
Hillary's been a fighter for LGBT equality foryears—and she's just getting warmed up. Read her fiercestquotes:
Go behind the scenes with Hillary at the#DemDebate:
She has a point: The economy does do betterwith a Democrat in the White
The feeling when a GOP candidate says it'sacceptable to be fired for being
Last night, Hillary was the only candidate toconfront GOP attacks on Planned
Your fights are Hillary's
No senior should have to choose betweenpaying their Medicare premium and buying groceries.hrc.io/1K98EzD
We can protect the Second Amendment whilealso protecting our families and communities from gunviolence.
"I can't think of anything more outsider thanelecting the first woman president." —Hillary
Last night, Hillary showed that she has thevision, the plans, and the determination to move this countryforward.
“Finally, fathers will be able to say to theirdaughters: you too can grow up to be president.”#DemDebate
A highlight of #DemDebate: Hillary stands upagainst Republican attacks on women's rights.
RT this if you’re proud to stand with Hillary.#ImWithHer
Are you with Hillary? Let her know:hrc.io/debate #DemDebate
We cannot go back to the failed policies of thepast. We will not go back. America's best days are still
"In this debate, we tried to deal with the verytough issues facing our country—in stark contrast to theRepublicans." -Hillary
Hillary ha luchado toda su vida por losderechos de las mujeres y no va a parar ahora.
Hillary has fought for women her whole life—and she's just getting started. #ImWithHer
Hillary on the enemies she's proud to havemade: "The NRA, health insurance companies, drugcompanies, the Iranians...and the
We need to find the right balance between civilliberties and national security.
There is no place in America for second-classcitizenship.
While the GOP focuses on villifying immigrants,Hillary will fight to protect DACA/DAPA and passcomprehensive immigration
We can't wait any longer for comprehensiveimmigration
Hillary va a mantener a las familias unidas.Expandirá DACA y DAPA, las órdenes ejecutivas, porque es
Los altos costos asociados con la universidadno deberían de ser un obstáculo para todos los que
No student should have to borrow money topay tuition at a public college.
We need to make college more
believes we should invest ina clean energy future—not build a pipeline to carry N.America's dirtiest fuel across the
No one is too big to jail–even on Wall
We need to enforce regulations to make surethat middle class families never have to bail out Wall
Subir los salarios y apoyar a la clase media esuna de las prioridades más importantes para el
The defining economic challenge of our time israising incomes for working
Racial inequality is not merely a symptom ofeconomic
We can't move forward until we tackle racialinequality that still exists—from economic opportunity toeducation to community
We cannot keep imprisoning more people thananyone else in the world.
"We need to tackle mass incarceration." -Hillary
"[Benghazi] committee is basically an arm ofthe RNC—I intend to keep talking about the issues that matterto the American people."
Hillary is a progressive who gets things done.#DemDebate
Hillary has the experience we need to navigatea dangerous world and keep us safe as our next commander-in-chief.
“President Obama asked me to be hisSecretary of State. He valued my judgment."
We can't allow guns to fall into the hands ofdomestic abusers, violent criminals, and the seriouslymentally ill.
When it comes to gun violence, we cannot giveup. We can't sit by while more good people die. We have toact.
Gun dealers and manufacturers who endangerAmericans should be held accountable.
Las matanzas no pueden continuar, tenemosun problema con las armas y Hillary va a hacer todo lo posiblepara
Gun ownership is part of the fabric of manylaw-abiding communities—but too many families in Americahave suffered from gun
We can protect the Second Amendment whilealso protecting our families and communities from gunviolence.
believes it's time to act ongun violence—and she has a plan to do it:
"This has gone on too long, and it's time thatthe entire country stood up against the NRA." -Hillary on gunviolence
We can't wait any longer to act on gunviolence prevention.
"I'm a progressive, but I'm a progressive whogets things done." -Hillary
"I've spent my entire adult life looking for waysto even the odds...to allow each child to live up to itspotential." -Hillary
¡El debate entre los candidatos demócratas ala presidencia está por empezar! Véanlo aquí
Let's do this.
Hillary doesn’t give up and she'll never quitfighting for families—but she needs your help:
One third of black men born today face theprospect of incarceration in their lifetimes. We can do
Hillary takes the stage for the first#DemDebate tonight. Join the conversation—follow these#Hillary2016 staff:
.@realDonaldTrump Glad you'll be watching.It's going to be
Happy birthday, @USNavy! Proud of thegenerations of brave sailors serving our country and thefamilies who love them.
Today we celebrate Dolores Huerta—teacher,organizer, activist—for her civic leadership and trailblazingspirit.
Hillary talks sexism in the workplace with@Buzzfeed’s @AnotherRound:
dropped by the @Culinary226protest to lend her support for work in families! This momentwas
Hillary's been debating important issues sincehigh school. Let her know you’re on her
“One of the merits is I am a
Thoughts and prayers aren’t enough—we mustact to protect families from gun
“As a woman...you’re expected to be bothstrong and vulnerable at the same time. That’s not easy todo.” -Hillary
.@Pharrell: “It’s Hillary time.”
We’re not going to “get over it,” @JohnKasich,we’re going to protect Social Security for the next
Sending support to Tamir Rice's loved ones.Too many black families are mourning the loss of a child. Weneed to change that reality.
"We need their voices, we need their activism."Hillary on the Black Lives Matter movement on@anotherround:
now! Subscribe att.co/0qpB51H7Kh.
When Hillary’s mother Dorothy needed achampion, someone was there. Today, Hillary’s fighting for allthe Dorothys.
Honored to have Congressman@repjohnlewis's
“I’ve told @KanyeWest that he might want towait.” Hillary to @AnotherRound—listen to the full interviewtonight.
Just 30% of girls around the world are enrolledin secondary school. Together, we can change that:dayofthegirl.org
"You will surprise yourself with what you’recapable of and the incredible things you [do]."#NationalComingOutDay
40 years ago, I married the cute guy from thelibrary. Happy anniversary, @billclinton—you've still got it!
On #NationalComingOutDay, we rememberthat our work isn’t done until everyone can be who they areand is treated with
The Republicans are spending millions to tryand stop her, but Hillary will never quit fighting for
Make history and help shatter one of thehighest glass ceilings. Apply to be a Hillary for America interntoday:
Thank you, @JerryBrownGov. Every stateshould follow your lead and make it easier to
.@KatyPerry’s coming to Iowa to supportHillary! RSVP for the Des Moines rally here:
This #WorldMentalHealthDay, let's commit toending stigma and making sure those who seek treatment aresupported and taken
Volunteers serenaded Hillary with "Lean onMe" to let her know she has friends in the Granite
We can protect the Second Amendment whilealso protecting our families and communities from gunviolence.
.@people is right, we can’t give up. It’s time toact on gun violence.
Last week, Hillary joined @MarcAnthony onstage at his concert in Miami. Thanks for the warm welcome,Marc!
¡Gracias @DoloresHuerta por apoyar a HillaryClinton! Para escuchar el mensaje de Dolores, envía HUERTAal
Racism is America's original sin. To those I metwith today, thank you for sharing your ideas.
Ever sent a kid to college? Hillary talks abouthow she and Bill handled dropping Chelsea off the first
Thank you,
If you work on Wall Street and commit a crime,you deserve to go to jail.
An important question from a young man:“Can you fix the prison
for presenting mew/ #CHCI Chair's Medallion Award. I'm in great companytonight! #2015HHM
Hillary sólo tiene una palabra para losRepublicanos que insultan a los latinos: ¡Basta!
Hillary at #CHCI to Republican candidates:Basta. Enough.
.@NRA Stop taking advantage of responsiblegun owners who want commonsense reform—including manyof your own
My plan for Wall Street: Hold individuals andcorporations accountable. Make tough rules and enforcethem. hrc.io/1ZhQib1
We need to enforce regulations on Wall Streetto make sure that the 2008 crisis never happens
Jeb should stop attacking voting rights andexplain what about citizens exercising their right to votescares him.
How about this @KevinMcCarthy for speakerinstead?
We need to make sure there’s accountabilityon Wall Street so there can be prosperity on Main
Hillary on standing up to the NRA: “We can’tjust say, OK, nothing we can do about it...We have got to fightback.”
"You were great on Saturday Night Live...so,can you do for us the Donald Trump
Pres. Obama's student aid bill of rights iscritical given ongoing predatory practices by student loanservicers. hrc.io/1L09liq
It’s time to end discrimination against LGBTAmericans once and for
Add your name if you think it’s time to takeaction on gun violence:
's snapchat is
We need comprehensive immigration reformwith a real path to full citizenship. There is no place inAmerica for second-class
Thank you,
We must act to stop gun violence, and wecannot wait any
Hillary’s commonsense steps will help reducegun violence and save lives, say @GabbyGiffords
Watch Hillary talk about the best advice hermom ever gave her.
Being a good parent has nothing to do withsexual orientation or gender
As Republicans spend millions of taxpayerdollars fighting Hillary, she does what she's always done: fightfor you.
“It's time for us to say, we're better than this."Hillary's plan to prevent gun violence:
Protecting communities should be our numberone priority—not the interests of the
Voy a reir, voy a bailar... LanzandoLatinos por Hillary con
Nicole Hockley—mother of Sandy Hook victimDylan and founder of @sandyhook—joined Hillary's gunviolence town hall.
We must act to stop gun violence, and wecannot wait any
We cannot sit by while more people
When it comes to preventing gun violence, wecannot give
It’s time to act on gun
on her plan tofight for commonsense reforms to prevent gun violence. Readher plan:
If Congress refuses to act to end this epidemicof gun violence, I'll take administrative action to do so.
As president, I'll push to close backgroundcheck loopholes like the "Charleston loophole" that let theshooter get a gun.
It's time to act on gun violence. We simplycannot accept as normal 33,000 gun deaths a year.
"It’s time for us to say, wait a minute. We’rebetter than this. Our country is better than this." —Hillary ongun
Watch live: Hillary unveils her gun violenceprevention policy in New Hampshire →
Hillary believes it’s time to act on gun violence.Read her plan here:
Town Hall will be live-streamedon t.co/LaKO1WT1YZ. Link t.co/EaRJgATOiG
on gun violence in America.#HillaryTODAY
Tune in to @todayshow for Hillary’s live townhall with @savannahguthrie, starting at 7:30 AM
In this week's Facebook Q&amp;A, Hillary tookon Jeb’s claim that Democrats use "free stuff" to appeal tominorities.
With the dangerous weather hitting SouthCarolina, please stay safe first and foremost. Take care,@HillaryforSC, and all affected.
LGBT rights are human rights and humanrights are LGBT rights --
Hillary finally gets to meet the mischievous,trash-eating puppy from the campaign launch video, “GettingStarted.”
We can’t wait any longer to act on gunviolence
has a DonaldTrump impression. #SNL
"Let us then tap our fists in
A vote for Hillary is a vote for four more yearsof Kate McKinnon's impression.
@HRC: 19 #transgender womenmurdered in 2015—primarily women of color. We have to endthe “crisis of transphobic
“Congress must pass the Federal EqualityAct.” Read Hillary’s remarks to the @HRC:
Hillary on the epidemic of gun
Grateful to have @NEAtoday on Team Hillary.Educators are the frontline fighters building a strongerAmerica.
"Congress must pass the Federal Equality Act[to] finally outlaw discrimination against LGBT peoplebasically everywhere."
"It’s outrageous that, in 2015, you can still befired for being gay...this kind of discrimination goes againsteverything we stand
"As President, I will push to cut off federalfunding for any public child welfare agency that discriminatesagainst LGBT people."
"Eleven states ban same-sex couples andLGBT individuals from adopting....one of the cruelest vestigesof anti-gay bigotry."
"We need to say with one voice thattransgender people are valued, they are loved, they are us" -Hillary at @HRC
La riqueza de la comunidad latina es su grandiversidad. Estamos orgullosos de lanzar Latinos por
Hillary finally gets to meet the mischievous,trash-eating puppy from the campaign launch video, “GettingStarted.”
Today the Immigration and Nationality Actturns 50. It was a first step towards making our system fair,but our work remains
¡Bienvenido a Latinos por Hillary,@marcanthony! Para también unirte textea LATINOS a
Join Hillary and @marcanthony: Text LATINOSto 47246 to be part of Latinos for
"I am well aware that this is a politicalmountain to climb....I will, as your president, never relent ontrying to work on this."
"Republicans keep refusing to do anything toprotect our communities. They put the NRA ahead ofAmerican families. It is wrong."
"We don't just need to pray...We need toact...Republicans and the NRA say, now is not the time to talkabout guns. Yes, it is."
"What is wrong with us that we can't stand upto the NRA and the gun lobby and the gun manufacturersthey represent?"
Thanks to #KnowTomorrow student activists,we're better prepared than ever to face the climate
Yet another reason we need to restore keyprotections of the Voting Rights Act. We're better than this.
Proud to have @wendydavis on Team
proudly partnered w/teachers,fighting for kids, her whole career. Teachers have her respectalways
Another devastating shooting. We needsensible gun control measures to save lives, and I will doeverything I can to achieve that.
Raising the minimum wage isn’t just awomen’s issue -- it’s also a family issue and an economicissue.
The United States is the only country in thedeveloped world without guaranteed paid leave. That has tochange.
In case you were wondering, you should befollowing hillaryclinton on Snapchat.
Hillary’s working to earn every vote, but needsyour support. Donate by tonight's deadline:
The @HillaryforNV team held a focus groupwith some of Hillary's littlest supporters.
You shouldn't have to worry about yourpaycheck or your job when you have a baby or someone inyour family gets
“Nobody in America should have to choosebetween buying the medicine they need and paying theirrent.” -Hillary
Did you know Hillary once had a job guttingsalmon in Alaska? Read about it in her interview with@lenadunham:
Hillary has a plan to cap covered prescriptiondrug costs at $250 per month:
In school, I learned how to think creatively andstand up for myself. #62MillionGirls don't have that chance.62milliongirls.com
#PinkOut for @PPFA because they providequality, affordable health care to those who need it most.#StandWithPP
For nearly 100 yrs, Planned Parenthood hasstood up to political attacks on women's health whileproviding care. GOP: You're outmatched.
Health care, college affordability, and pumpkinspice lattes—read everything you missed from Hillary’sFacebook Q&amp;A:
Excited to be part of @lennyletter's first issue!Read Hillary's interview with @lenadunham:
When Republicans attack PlannedParenthood, they’re attacking women’s health. Proud to#StandWithPP—and always
#PantsuitGoals
El Papa Francisco tiene razón. Todos lospaíses...tienen la responsabilidad de prevenir el cambioclimático.
During a Facebook Q&amp;A, Hillaryresponded to Jeb's claim that Democrats appeal to AfricanAmericans with "free stuff":
Wishing all Korean Americans and theirfamilies a safe and happy
.@NASA has found water on Mars. There is nolimit to what we can discover when we explore, askquestions, and listen to
If the medicine you need costs less in Canada,you should be able to buy it from Canada—or any countrythat meets our safety
.@lorellapraeli, la Directora de Asuntos Latinosde #Hillary2016, comparte su historia
America’s diversity is what makes us great.The GOP apparently doesn’t see it that
Grateful to @Martin_Dempsey for long anddistinguished service to our nation. It was an honor to workwith him to keep our country safe.
"A feminist is by definition someone whobelieves in equal rights." —Hillary
.@lorellapraeli—DREAMer, activist,#Hillary2016 Latino Outreach Director—shares her story ofovercoming obstacles:
Top CEOs earn 300 times more than a typicalAmerican worker. That’s wrong. It’s time for Americans to geta
Making friends in Des Moines,
Mikaylah had to write a sentence using theword “can” for homework. A+. (via
Today in 1981, Sandra Day O’Connor becamethe first woman appointed to the Supreme
Hillary on @Pontifex's climate message:"There’s no time to waste. We have to act now. Pope Francisis right."
You don’t have to be a scientist to take onclimate change—you just have to be willing to
For every daughter who dreams that someday,she’ll be president—join #WomenforHillary:
Wishing a blessed Eid to those celebrating EidAl-Adha. My thoughts and prayers are with those affected bythe tragedy in Mecca today.
The official soundtrack for shattering glassceilings, by #WomenforHillary on @Spotify:
Gracias, @Pontifex. Tenemos que cuidar elmedio ambiente, crear oportunidades económicas y defenderlos derechos y la dignidad de
Hillary believes that what’s good for women isgood for America.
accomplishment: 5years of helping women, families and environment with clean@cookstoves:
The Senate was right to block a resolution thatwould defund Planned Parenthood. Now, stop these attacks—and don't shut down the
This is our country, and we won’t stay trappedbeneath glass. Join #WomenforHillary:
Thank you, @Pontifex. We have much to do tocare for our planet, strengthen economic opportunity, anddefend the rights &amp; dignity of all.
"A feminist is by definition someone whobelieves in equal rights." —Hillary to Lena
.@lenadunham: "Do you consider yourself afeminist?" Hillary: "Yes. Absolutely."
It’s not enough to condemn campus sexualassault. We need to end it.
We must renew the basic bargain of America:If you work hard and you do your part, you should be able toget ahead and stay
☝️ No, really—read Hillary’s comprehensiveplan for lowering health care costs for working
Lower health care costs means families shouldsee savings, not insurance companies. Hillary's planaddresses this.
Hillary opposes the Keystone pipeline. Readwhy:
Why Hillary opposes the Keystone
Diversity is a strength, not a weakness. TheGOP disagrees:
"Baseball is 90% mental—the other half isphysical." Yogi gave everything at least 140%. We'll miss him.My prayers are with his family.
on @TJMShowNOW. Listen:
Hillary is joining Tom Joyner on the@TJMShow! Tune in →
Good that Turing will lower an essential drug'sprice. Hillary's plan would prevent price gouging in the firstplace:
Time to invest in a clean energy future—notbuild a pipeline to carry our continent's dirtiest fuel across theUS. I oppose Keystone XL.
Good.
@deray: Let's meet; we want to hear fromanyone ready to address this urgent problem and worktoward solutions. Our team will follow
Wishing an easy fast for all those observingYom
Hillary's prescription plan would cap out-of-pocket costs at $250 per month. What would you do withyour savings?
"If we’re serious about raising people’sincomes, we have to bring down out-of-pocket
"If the medicine you need costs less inCanada, you should be able to buy it from Canada—or anycountry that meets our safety
"Under my plan, I’ll cap out-of-pocket drugcosts for families. You won’t have to pay more than$250/month for covered
Hillary’s prescription drug reform plan: "I wantto both protect consumers and promote innovation—whileputting an end to
The uninsured rate is the lowest in decades,but prescription costs, out-of-pocket costs, and premiumsare growing. We need to do
Hillary on her plan to stop drug companies'price gouging, boost innovation, and keep money in families'pockets →
Outrageous. When companies put profitsahead of safety and the environment, there should beconsequences.
The best way to celebrate National VoterRegistration Day: Register to vote! →nationalvoterregistrationday.org/re…
We need labor law reform. The #WAGEActwould protect workers' rights, now Congress should pass it.
David Axelrod, former Senior Advisor toPresident Obama, on Hillary’s greatest
Every child deserves the opportunity tosucceed, no matter who their parents are or where they’refrom.
Couldn't agree more, @HumaAbedin. Welcometo Twitter!
Hillary on what the attacks against PlannedParenthood are really about:
HBCUs serve some of our brightest studentsand are a bridge to equal opportunity. Proud to support themthis #HBCUweek and year round.
At the #Emmys, @violadavis became the firstblack woman to win Outstanding Lead Actress in a drama.Bravo, Viola!
Can a Muslim be President of the UnitedStates of America? In a word: Yes. Now let's move on.
Price gouging like this in the specialty drugmarket is outrageous. Tomorrow I'll lay out a plan to take iton. -H
Hillary’s work “was an important part of thereason their lives were
"These are our moms and our dads.” Keithfrom New Hampshire thanks Hillary for speaking up forcaregivers:
A moving moment backstage: "I'm taking careof my mom, she has Alzheimer's...thank you for speaking upfor that."
On September 20, 1973, tennis star@BillieJeanKing defeated Bobby Riggs in a match titled “TheBattle of the
Hillary: A champion for women’s
Where are we on gefilte fish? Hillary talksemails with @JimmyFallon.
Carly Fiorina challenged Democrats to namean accomplishment of Hillary’s. @SenatorLeahy
Keith from NH works part-time so he can carefor his mom. He shared his story with Hillary:
"I cannot imagine anyone being more of anoutsider than the first woman
se unió a la despedida de DonFrancisco felicitándolo y dándole las gracias.#SGHastaSiempre
"I believe in America, we should have eachother’s backs." Watch Hillary at
.@POTUS is right: When we ensure blackwomen and girls have the opportunity to live up to their God-given potential, America gets ahead.
What Every 20-Something Should Know AboutHillary Clinton: youtu.be/lJz1nAfgczk via
It's indisputable that having a Democrat in theWhite House is good for our
Senator Chuck Schumer: Hillary helped“restore the shattered credibility of the United
The hair’s real; the color’s not. Hillary’simpression of Donald Trump on
Cheers to you, @jimmyfallon. Happy birthday!
Proud to have the support of New Hampshire’sgreat governor, @Maggie_Hassan.
Post-speech dance break at the NewHampshire Democratic Party State Convention. (via @ABCLiz)#603forHRC
“If you want a president who will listen to you,work her heart out to make your life better—then you’relookin’ at her."—Hillary
.@BarbaraBoxer on Hillary’s greatestaccomplishments, from Iranian sanctions to women’s rightsaround the
A proud step
“That is what I intend to
What is Hillary's greatest accomplishment?Here's a list from 20 top American leaders and
Donald Trump not denouncing falsestatements about POTUS &amp; hateful rhetoric aboutMuslims is disturbing, &amp; just plain wrong. Cut it out.
Love this idea, @smrtgrls. If you werepresident, what’s the first thing you would do?#SmartGirlsAsk
The @VPCinfo report shows we have morework to do to end violence against women in South Carolinaand every state.
Hillary to @SpeakerBoehner: Shutting downour government over a partisan attack on PlannedParenthood is just wrong.
"Don’t attack women’s health care. And don’tshut down the government." Hillary's message toRepublicans:
Well said,
Trump: "Are you writing all this down?" Hillary:"Let me grab my pen..."
Heading to New Hampshire and just read thatthere's an emu on the loose! Seems like a story with legs.
No, they’re not talking about the GOP debate.Catch Hillary on @jimmyfallon
For a bunch of people who don't believe inacting on climate change, the Republican candidates seemcommitted to recycling ideas.
You don’t have to be a scientist to know thatclimate change is an urgent challenge that threatens us all.We need to
We need commonsense reforms that keepweapons out of the hands of criminals and the violentlyunstable and respect responsible gun
Tired of the #GOPdebate? We askedsupporters what they were doing instead. Here were some ofour favorites:
Fingers crossed we're getting close to the partwhen they talk about things they're for—instead of
¿Quieres recibir nuestras reacciones sobre eldebate republicano en español por mensajes de texto? EnvíaDEBATE a
Still a good time to sign
The defining economic challenge of our time israising incomes. That's how hardworking Americans will getahead and stay ahead.
Los estadounidenses que trabajan duro cadadía deberían de poder salir adelante. Nuestro desafíoeconómico es aumentar sus
The GOP's ideas for the economy are justtrickle-down economics in disguise. We need a new plan forthe 21st century.
La libertad incluye el derecho de hablar encualquier idioma. Eso nos hace fuerte como país y es algoque debemos celebrar—no
.@realdonaldtrump should stop complimentingwomen and start respecting them.
Hard-working, law-abiding immigrant familiesdeserve a path to earned citizenship—not second-classstatus.
La idea de que los Estados Unidos va adeportar 11 millones de personas es
What you’re missing if you’re not getting textsfrom Hillary. Text “REACT” to 47246 to join the
Women—not the politicians on stage—shouldmake decisions about their own reproductive health care.Period.
Marriage equality is the law of the land.Officials don't have to agree—but they do have to uphold thelaw.
America and our allies—especially Israel—willbe safer if we enforce the nuclear agreement with
Tearing up the Iran nuclear deal isn'tleadership—it's
t.co/kVWDUNMNYo#WomenForHillary
Síganos en @TheBriefing2016 para nuestras reacciones sobre el debate republicano que está
"Como Presidenta, siempre estaré con lacomunidad latina." Lea la op-ed de
on Snapchat was thewisest move I've made this election cycle. Shade for days#Hillary2016
Congress must reauthorize the Zadroga Act.We owe it to 9/11 responders to provide them with the carethey need.
Today’s the day the Republican presidential candidates meet for the second debate. Follow@TheBriefing2016 for fact-checks and
Assumptions and fear don't keep us safe—they hold us back. Ahmed, stay curious and keep
See where Hillary stands on many issues, fromcollege affordability to voting rights expansion:
We’re having a lot of fun on @Snapchat. Youshould follow us!
Encouraging news. We should make it easierto vote in every
I used to love reading to @ChelseaClinton, andnow she's written her own book. I’m so proud. Pick up#ItsYourWorld today!
While others attack, insult, and denigrate—today we proudly celebrate the beginning of HispanicHeritage Month. Sí se puede.
Hillary has been fighting for women andfamilies her entire life. If you're with her, chip in
Events in Ferguson stem from structuralinequities. We need to acknowledge and confront them tomove forward. -H
Hillary to every survivor of sexual assault: Youhave the right to be heard and believed. We're with
Hillary's message to survivors of sexualassault: We're with you.
Tune in to @extratv tonight to catch Hillarytalking Trump, social media, and @KimKardashian. Sneakpreview:
Unions help keep working families strong.Scott Walker's attacks on unions and workers' rights aren'tleadership—they're bullying.
RT to join Hillary in telling survivors of sexualassault: We're with
"To every survivor of sexual assault...You havethe right to be heard. You have the right to be believed. We'rewith you."
“Rape is a crime—wherever it
“It is not enough to condemn campus sexual assault. We need to end campus sexual assault.”
Watch live now: Hillary speaks on the fight toensure every woman in America can fulfill her potential
“We can’t stop the world from changing, butwe can help to shape those changes." Hillary and the IranDeal:
"We can lift each other up and leave no onebehind." Hillary's remarks at @FoundryUMC
It’s time we recognize that we have a drug andalcohol addiction epidemic on our hands—and act to addressit.
Our prisons—where 2/3 inmates meet criteriafor substance use disorders—are no substitute for treatment.We must reform our justice
Our health care system allows too manypeople with substance use disorders to go without care. Weneed to invest in
23 million Americans suffer from addiction, butonly 1 in 10 get the treatment they
Drug and alcohol addiction is a disease, not amoral failing—and we must treat it as
Leadership is about strength, smart choices,and an unyielding commitment to America’s
Happy Grandparents Day!
L'Shana Tova! To all who celebrate, wishing you a sweet and healthy new year.
Every woman and family deserves safety fromviolence. On VAWA's anniversary, we have more to do toprevent violence and support
We have an obligation not just to our ownchildren and grandchildren, but to every child in
We need to work to make sure that we giveevery child in America the same
Take it from
We need to put our elections back in thehands of everyday
Every future president needs
At liftoff 23 years ago today, @maejemisonmade history &amp; became the first African Americanwoman to travel in
We lost many brave Americans on September11, 2001—and in the years since, because of it. Today wemourn and honor them.
9/11 responders deserve our support for theirsacrifice. Congress must reauthorize the Zadroga 9/11 Healthand Compensation Act.
on snapchatwas a pretty good decision
Five-year-old Macey tells Hillary about her presidential aspirations backstage at
Highlight of the week: A sitdown withAmerica’s cutest presidential history
Hillary’s life wouldn’t have been the samewithout the guidance of some special
.@DavidMuir asked: “Is your mother’s voice inyour ear?” Watch Hillary's

Hillary on
"We can’t stop the world from changing, butwe can shape the changes...by leading with strength, smarts&amp; commitment to our
“I will always stand by Israel’s right to defenditself, as I always have.”
“As president, I will take whatever actions arenecessary to protect the United States and our
"Here’s my message to Iran’s leaders: The United States will never allow you to acquire a nuclearweapon."
"Is it perfect? No agreement like this ever is.But is it a strong agreement? Yes. And we absolutely shouldnot turn it down."
"I support this deal—as part of a largerstrategy toward Iran."
Watch live now: Hillary speaks on the Iran Deal→
A note from Hillary on her email:
Hillary to @DavidMuir: "I should have used twoaccounts... I’m sorry about that, I take
Had so much fun at @theellenshow today.Tune in on Thursday!
This weekend in Iowa, a mom told Hillary: "I’mcounting on you to know what it’s like to be a workingmother.”
.@TheEllenShow but seriously, where are weon gefilte

I'm running for president to knock down all the barriers that are holding Americans back, and to rebuild the ladders of opportunity that will give every American a chance to advance, especially those who have been left out and left behind.
I know a lot of Americans are angry about the economy. And for good cause. Americans haven't had a raise in 15 years. There aren't enough good-paying jobs, especially for young people. And yes, the economy is rigged in favor of those at the top.
I can only say that we both share the goal of universal health care coverage. You know, before it was called Obamacare, it was called Hillarycare. And I took on the drug companies and I took on the insurance companies to try to get us universal health care coverage.
Well, let me just -- let me just say, once again...
No. But it is absolutely fair and necessary for Americans to vet both of our proposals, to ask the really hard questions about, what is it we think we can accomplish, why do we believe that, and what would be the results for the average American family?
So we have a special obligation to make clear what we stand for, which is why I think we should not make promises we can't keep, because that will further, I think, alienate Americans from understanding and believing we can together make some real changes in people's lives.
I will put a price tag. My price tag is about $100 billion a year. And again, paid for. And what I have said is I will not throw us further into debt. I believe I can get the money that I need by taxing the wealthy, by closing loopholes, the things that we are way overdue for doing.
And I think once I'm in the White House we will have enough political capital to be able to do that.
But I am conscious of the fact that we have to also be very clear, especially with young people, about what kind of government is going to do what for them and what it will cost.
You know, I think, again, both of us share the goal of trying to make college affordable for all young Americans. And I have set forth a compact that would do just that for debt-free tuition.
Well, first, Judy, I have spent my entire adult life working toward making sure that women are empowered to make their own choices, even if that choice is not to vote for me. I believe that it's most important that we unleash the full potential of women and girls in our society.
And I feel very strongly that I have an agenda, I have a record that really does respond to a lot of the specific needs that the women in our country face. So I'm going to keep making that case. I'm going to keep making sure that everything I've done, everything that I stand for is going to be well known.
But I have no argument with anyone making up her mind about who to support. I just hope that by the end of this campaign there will be a lot more supporting me. That's what I'm working towards.
Well, look, I think that she's been saying that for as long as I've known her, which is about 25 years. But it doesn't change my view that we need to empower everyone, women and men, to make the best decisions in their minds that they can make. That's what I've always stood for.
And when it comes to the issues that are really on the front lines as to whether we're going to have equal pay, paid family leave, some opportunity for, you know, women to go as far as their hard work and talent take them, I think that we still have some barriers to knock down, which is why that's at the core of my campaign.
I would note, just for a historic aside, somebody told me earlier today we've had like 200 presidential primary debates, and this is the first time there have been a majority of women on the stage. So, you know, we'll take our progress wherever we can find it.
You know, I have said -- I have said many times, you know, I'm not asking people to support me because I'm a woman. I'm asking people to support me because I think I'm the most qualified, experienced, and ready person to be the president and the commander- in-chief.
I'm very proud that NARAL endorsed me because when it comes to it we need a leader on women's issues. Somebody who, yes, votes right, but much more than that, leads the efforts to protect the hard-fought gains that women have made, that, make no mistake about it, are under tremendous attack, not just by the Republican presidential candidates but by a whole national effort to try to set back women's rights.
You know, I completely agree with Senator Sanders. The first speech I gave in this campaign back in April was about criminal justice reform and ending the era of mass incarceration.
The statistics from Wisconsin are particularly troubling, because it is the highest rate of incarceration for African-Americans in our nation, twice the national average. And we know of the tragic, terrible event that lead to the death of Dontre Hamilton right here in Milwaukee, a young man unarmed, who should still be with us.
His family certainly believes that. And so do I. So we have work to do. There have been some good recommendations about what needs to happen. President Obama's policing commission came out with some. I have fully endorsed those.
But we have to restore policing that will actually protect the communities that police officers are sworn to protect.
And, then we have to go after sentencing, and that's one of the problems here in Wisconsin because so much of what happened in the criminal justice system doesn't happen at the federal level, it happens at the state and local level.
But, I would also add this. There are other racial discrepancies. Really systemic racism in this state, as in others, education, in employment, in the kinds of factors that too often lead from a position where young people, particularly young men, are pushed out of school early, are denied employment opportunities. So, when we talk about criminal justice reform, and ending the era of mass incarceration, we also have to talk about jobs, education, housing, and other ways of helping communities.
Well, I'm just not sure I agree completely with that assessment. I think under President Obama we have seen a lot of advances, the Affordable Care Act has helped more African Americans than any other group to get insurance, to be taken care of, but we also know a lot more than we did. We have a lot more social media, we have everybody with a cellphone.
So, we are seeing the dark side of the remaining systemic racism that we have to root out in our society. I think President Obama has set a great example. I think he has addressed a lot of these issues that have been quite difficult, but he has gone forward. Now, what we have to do is to build on an honest conversation about where we go next.
Look, I am deeply concerned about what's happening in every community in America, and that includes white communities, where we are seeing an increase in alcoholism, addiction, earlier deaths. People with a high school education or less are not even living as long as their parents lived. This is a remarkable and horrifying fact.
And that's why I've come forward with, for example, a plan to revitalize coal country, the coalfield communities that have been so hard hit by the changing economy, by the reduction in the use of coal. You know, coal miners and their families who helped turn on the lights and power our factories for generations are now wondering, has our country forgotten us? Do people not care about all of our sacrifice?
And I'm going to do everything I can to address distressed communities, whether they are communities of color, whether they are white communities, whether they are in any part of our country.
I particularly appreciate the proposal that Congressman Jim Clyburn has -- the 10-20-30 proposal -- to try to spend more federal dollars in communities with persistent generational poverty. And you know what? If you look at the numbers, there are actually as many, if not more white communities that are truly being left behind and left out.
So, yes, I do think it would be a terrible oversight not to try to address the very real problems that white Americans -- particularly those without a lot of education whose jobs have -- you know, no longer provided them or even no longer present in their communities, because we have to focus where the real hurt is. And that's why, as president, I will look at communities that need special help and try to deliver that.
I strongly support the president's executive actions. I hope the Supreme Court upholds them. I think there is constitutional and legal authority for the president to have done what he did.
I am against the raids. I'm against the kind of inhumane treatment that is now being visited upon families, waking them up in the middle of the night, rounding them up. We should be deporting criminals, not hardworking immigrant families who do the very best they can and often are keeping economies going in many places in our country.
Two quick responses. One, with respect to the Central American children, I made it very clear that those children needed to be processed appropriately, but we also had to send a message to families and communities in Central America not to send their children on this dangerous journey in the hands of smugglers.
I've also called for the end of family detention, for the end of privately-run detention centers, along with private prisons, which I think are really against the common good and the rule of law.
And with respect to the 2007 bill, this was Ted Kennedy's bill. And I think Ted Kennedy had a very clear idea about what needed to be done. And I was proud to stand with him and support it.
Well, that just wasn't -- that just wasn't the fact, Senator. The fact is that there was a great effort made by the Obama administration and others to really send a clear message, because we knew that so many of these children were being abused, being treated terribly while they tried to get to our border.
I think -- I think it's fair to say we don't have a disagreement. We both believe there has to be more money going into the Social Security system. I've said I'm looking at a couple of different ways, one which you mentioned, Senator, but also trying to expand the existing tax to passive income that wealthy people have so that we do get more revenue into the Social Security Trust Fund.
I have a slightly different approach, though, about what we should do with that initially. First, rather than expand benefits for everyone, I do want to take care of low-income seniors who worked at low-wage jobs. I want to take care of women. When the Social Security program was started in the 1930s, not very many women worked. And women have been disadvantaged ever since. They do not get any credit for their care-taking responsibilities. And the people who are often the most hard-hit are widows, because when their spouse dies, they can lose up to one-half of their Social Security monthly payment. So we have no disagreement about the need to buttress Social Security, get more revenue into the program. But I want to start by helping those people who are most at risk, the ones who, yes, are cutting their pills in half, who don't believe they can make the rent, who are worried about what comes next for them.
Well, Senator, look, I think we're in vigorous agreement here. We both want to get more revenue in. I have yet to see a proposal that you're describing that the -- raising the cap would apply to passive income. That has not been...
Well, that has not been a part of most of the proposals that I've seen. I'm interested in making sure we get the maximum amount of revenue from those who can well afford to provide it. So I'm going to come up with the best way forward. We're going to end up in the same place. We're going to get more revenue. I'm going to prioritize those recipients who need the most help first.
I can't speak for the Koch Brothers, you're referring to a Super PAC that we don't coordinate with, that was set up to support President Obama, that has now decided that they want to support me. They are the ones who should respond to any questions.
Let's talk about our campaigns. I'm very proud of the fact that we have more than 750 thousand donors, and the vast majority of them are giving small contributions. So, I'm proud of Senator Sanders, and his supporters. I think it's great that Senator Sanders, President Obama and I have more donors than any three people who have every run, certainly on the Democratic side. That's the way it should be, and I'm going to continue to reach out to thank all my online contributors for everything they are doing for me, to encourage them and help me do more just as Senator Sanders is.
I think that is the real key here. We both have a lot of small donors. I think that sets us apart from a lot of what's happening right now on the Republican side.
The Koch Brothers have a very clear political agenda. It is an agenda, in my view, that would do great harm to our country. We're going to fight it as hard as we can, and we're going to fight whoever the Republicans nominate who will depend on the Koch Brothers, and others.
We are mixing apples and oranges. My 750,000 donors have contributed more than a million and a half donations. I'm very proud. That, I think, between the two of us demonstrates the strength of the support we have among people who want to see change in our country.
But, the real issue, I think, that the Senator is injecting into this is that if you had a Super PAC, like President Obama has, which now says it wants to support me. It's not my PAC. If you take donations from Wall Street, you can't be independent.
I would just say, I debated then Senator Obama numerous times on stages like this, and he was the recipient of the largest number of Wall Street donations of anybody running on the Democratic side ever.
Now, when it mattered, he stood up and took on Wall Street. He pushed through, and he passed the Dodd-Frank regulation, the toughest regulations since the 1930's. So, let's not in anyway imply here that either President Obama or myself, would in anyway not take on any vested interested, whether it's Wall Street, or drug companies, or insurance companies, or frankly, the gun lobby to stand up to do what's best for the American people.
Well, let's just -- let's just follow up on this, because, you know, I've made it very clear that no bank is too big to fail, no executive too powerful to jail, and because of Dodd-Frank, we now have in law a process that the president, the Federal Reserve, and others can use if any bank poses a systemic risk. I think that's a major accomplishment.
I agree, however, it doesn't go far enough, because what it focuses on are the big banks, which Senator Sanders has talked about a lot, for good reason. I go further in the plan that I've proposed, which has been called the toughest, most effective, comprehensive plan for reining in the other risks that the financial system could face. It was an investment bank, Lehman Brothers, that contributed to our collapse. It was a big insurance company, AIG. It was Countrywide Mortgage. My plan would sweep all of them into a regulatory framework so we can try to get ahead of what the next problems might be.
And I believe that not only Barney Frank, Paul Krugman, and others, have said that what I have proposed is the most effective. It goes in the right direction. We have Dodd-Frank. We can use it to break up the banks, if that's appropriate. But let's not kid ourselves. As we speak, there are new problems on the horizon. I want to get ahead of those, and that's why I've proposed a much more comprehensive approach to deal with all of these...
Absolutely. And, you know, there are a number of programs that I think are duplicative and redundant and not producing the results that people deserve. There are a lot of training programs and education programs that I think can be streamlined and put into a much better format so that if we do continue them they can be more useful, in public schools, community colleges, and colleges and universities.
I would like to take a hard look at every part of the federal government and really do the kind of analysis that would rebuild some confidence in people that we're taking a hard look about what we have, you know, and what we don't need anymore. And that's what I intend to do.
Look, I think we are readier than we used to be, but it's a constant effort that has to be undertaken to make sure we are as ready as we need to be. We have made a lot of improvements in our domestic security since 9/11, and we have been able to foil and prevent attacks, yet we see the terrible attack in San Bernardino and know that we haven't done enough.
If I could just respond. Two points. One, Senator Sanders voted in 1998 on what I think is fair to call a regime change resolution with respect to Iraq, calling for the end of Saddam Hussein's regime.
You did support a U.N. Security Council approach, which we did follow up on. And, look, I think it's important to look at what the most important counterterrorism judgment of the first four years of the Obama administration was, and that was the very difficult decision as to whether or not to advise the president to go after bin Laden.
I looked at the evidence. I looked at the intelligence. I got the briefings. I recommended that the president go forward. It was a hard choice. Not all of his top national security advisors agreed with that. And at the end of the day, it was the president's decision. So he had to leave the Situation Room after hearing from the small group advising him and he had to make that decision. I'm proud that I gave him that advice. And I'm very grateful to the brave Navy SEALs who carried out that mission.
That's fine. That's fine.
And, yes, people we may disagree with on a number of things may have some insight, may have some relationships that are important for the president to understand in order to best protect the United States.
Well, I respectfully disagree. I think we have achieved a great deal with the Iranian nuclear agreement to put a lid on the Iranian nuclear weapons program. That has to be enforced absolutely with consequences for Iran at the slightest deviation from their requirements under the agreement.
I do not think we should promise or even look toward normalizing relations because we have a lot of other business to get done with Iran. Yes, they have to stop being the main state sponsor of terrorism. Yes, they have to stop trying to destabilize the Middle East, causing even more chaos.
Yes, they've got to get out of Syria. They've got to quit sponsoring Hezbollah and Hamas. They have got to quit trying to ship rockets into Gaza that can be used against Israel.
... Senator Sanders, from a debate in 2008, quote what I said. The question was, would you meet with an adversary without conditions? I said no. And in fact, in Obama administration, we did not meet with anybody without conditions. That is the appropriate approach in order to get the results that you are seeking.
Well, I was pleased that NATO announced just this week that they're going to start doing patrols in the Mediterranean, in the Aegean, to try to interdict the smugglers, to try to prevent the kind of tragedies that we have seen all too often, also to try to prevent more refugees from coming to the European Union.
And it's especially significant that they are working with both Turkey and Greece in order to do this.
With respect to the United States, I think our role in NATO, our support for the E.U., as well as our willingness to take refugees so long as they are thoroughly vetted and that we have confidence from intelligence and other sources that they can come to our country, we should be doing our part.
And we should back up the recent donors conference to make sure we have made our contribution to try to deal with the enormous cost that these refugees are posing to Turkey and to members of the E.U. in particular.
This is a humanitarian catastrophe. There is no other description of it. So we do as the United States have to support our friends, our allies in Europe. We have to stand with them. We have to provide financial support to them. We have to provide the NATO support to back up the mission that is going on. And we have to take properly vetted refugees ourselves.
I certainly agree with FDR for all the reasons Senator Sanders said. And I agree about the role that he played both in war and in peace on the economy and defeating fascism around the world. I would choose Nelson Mandela for his generosity of heart, his understanding of the need for reconciliation.
But I want to -- I want to follow up on something having to do with leadership, because, you know, today Senator Sanders said that President Obama failed the presidential leadership test. And this is not the first time that he has criticized President Obama. In the past he has called him weak. He has called him a disappointment.
... who got us out of that...
... put us on firm ground, and has sent us into the future. And it is a -- the kind of criticism that we've heard from Senator Sanders about our president I expect from Republicans. I do not expect from someone running for the Democratic nomination to succeed President Obama.
You know, Senator, what I am concerned about, is not disagreement on issues, saying that this is what I would rather do, I don't agree with the president on that, calling the president weak, calling him a disappointment, calling several times that he should have a primary opponent when he ran for re-election in 2012, you know, I think that goes further than saying we have our disagreements.
You know, we -- we agree that we've got to get unaccountable money out of politics. We agree that Wall Street should never be allowed to wreck Main Street again.
But here's the point I want to make tonight. I am not a single- issue candidate, and I do not believe we live in a single-issue country. I think that a lot of what we have to overcome to break down the barriers that are holding people back, whether it's poison in the water of the children of Flint, or whether it's the poor miners who are being left out and left behind in coal country, or whether it is any other American today who feels somehow put down and oppressed by racism, by sexism, by discrimination against the LGBT community, against the kind of efforts that need to be made to root out all of these barriers, that's what I want to take on.
And here in Wisconsin, I want to reiterate: We've got to stand up for unions and working people who have done it before.

Good evening, and let me express my deep honor and pleasure at being here. I want to thank Director General Tokayev and Ms. Wyden along with other ministers, ambassadors, excellencies, and UN partners. This weekend, we will celebrate Human Rights Day, the anniversary of one of the great accomplishments of the last century. 
Beginning in 1947, delegates from six continents devoted themselves to drafting a declaration that would enshrine the fundamental rights and freedoms of people everywhere. In the aftermath of World War II, many nations pressed for a statement of this kind to help ensure that we would prevent future atrocities and protect the inherent humanity and dignity of all people. And so the delegates went to work. They discussed, they wrote, they revisited, revised, rewrote, for thousands of hours. And they incorporated suggestions and revisions from governments, organizations, and individuals around the world. 
At three o’clock in the morning on December 10th, 1948, after nearly two years of drafting and one last long night of debate, the president of the UN General Assembly called for a vote on the final text. Forty-eight nations voted in favor; eight abstained; none dissented. And the Universal Declaration of Human Rights was adopted. It proclaims a simple, powerful idea: All human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights. And with the declaration, it was made clear that rights are not conferred by government; they are the birthright of all people. It does not matter what country we live in, who our leaders are, or even who we are. Because we are human, we therefore have rights. And because we have rights, governments are bound to protect them. 
In the 63 years since the declaration was adopted, many nations have made great progress in making human rights a human reality. Step by step, barriers that once prevented people from enjoying the full measure of liberty, the full experience of dignity, and the full benefits of humanity have fallen away. In many places, racist laws have been repealed, legal and social practices that relegated women to second-class status have been abolished, the ability of religious minorities to practice their faith freely has been secured. 
In most cases, this progress was not easily won. People fought and organized and campaigned in public squares and private spaces to change not only laws, but hearts and minds. And thanks to that work of generations, for millions of individuals whose lives were once narrowed by injustice, they are now able to live more freely and to participate more fully in the political, economic, and social lives of their communities. 
Now, there is still, as you all know, much more to be done to secure that commitment, that reality, and progress for all people. Today, I want to talk about the work we have left to do to protect one group of people whose human rights are still denied in too many parts of the world today. In many ways, they are an invisible minority. They are arrested, beaten, terrorized, even executed. Many are treated with contempt and violence by their fellow citizens while authorities empowered to protect them look the other way or, too often, even join in the abuse. They are denied opportunities to work and learn, driven from their homes and countries, and forced to suppress or deny who they are to protect themselves from harm. 
I am talking about gay, lesbian, bisexual, and transgender people, human beings born free and given bestowed equality and dignity, who have a right to claim that, which is now one of the remaining human rights challenges of our time. I speak about this subject knowing that my own country’s record on human rights for gay people is far from perfect. Until 2003, it was still a crime in parts of our country. Many LGBT Americans have endured violence and harassment in their own lives, and for some, including many young people, bullying and exclusion are daily experiences. So we, like all nations, have more work to do to protect human rights at home. 
Now, raising this issue, I know, is sensitive for many people and that the obstacles standing in the way of protecting the human rights of LGBT people rest on deeply held personal, political, cultural, and religious beliefs. So I come here before you with respect, understanding, and humility. Even though progress on this front is not easy, we cannot delay acting. So in that spirit, I want to talk about the difficult and important issues we must address together to reach a global consensus that recognizes the human rights of LGBT citizens everywhere. 
The first issue goes to the heart of the matter. Some have suggested that gay rights and human rights are separate and distinct; but, in fact, they are one and the same. Now, of course, 60 years ago, the governments that drafted and passed the Universal Declaration of Human Rights were not thinking about how it applied to the LGBT community. They also weren’t thinking about how it applied to indigenous people or children or people with disabilities or other marginalized groups. Yet in the past 60 years, we have come to recognize that members of these groups are entitled to the full measure of dignity and rights, because, like all people, they share a common humanity.
This recognition did not occur all at once. It evolved over time. And as it did, we understood that we were honoring rights that people always had, rather than creating new or special rights for them. Like being a woman, like being a racial, religious, tribal, or ethnic minority, being LGBT does not make you less human. And that is why gay rights are human rights, and human rights are gay rights. 
It is violation of human rights when people are beaten or killed because of their sexual orientation, or because they do not conform to cultural norms about how men and women should look or behave. It is a violation of human rights when governments declare it illegal to be gay, or allow those who harm gay people to go unpunished. It is a violation of human rights when lesbian or transgendered women are subjected to so-called corrective rape, or forcibly subjected to hormone treatments, or when people are murdered after public calls for violence toward gays, or when they are forced to flee their nations and seek asylum in other lands to save their lives. And it is a violation of human rights when life-saving care is withheld from people because they are gay, or equal access to justice is denied to people because they are gay, or public spaces are out of bounds to people because they are gay. No matter what we look like, where we come from, or who we are, we are all equally entitled to our human rights and dignity.
The second issue is a question of whether homosexuality arises from a particular part of the world. Some seem to believe it is a Western phenomenon, and therefore people outside the West have grounds to reject it. Well, in reality, gay people are born into and belong to every society in the world. They are all ages, all races, all faiths; they are doctors and teachers, farmers and bankers, soldiers and athletes; and whether we know it, or whether we acknowledge it, they are our family, our friends, and our neighbors.
Being gay is not a Western invention; it is a human reality. And protecting the human rights of all people, gay or straight, is not something that only Western governments do. South Africa’s constitution, written in the aftermath of Apartheid, protects the equality of all citizens, including gay people. In Colombia and Argentina, the rights of gays are also legally protected. In Nepal, the supreme court has ruled that equal rights apply to LGBT citizens. The Government of Mongolia has committed to pursue new legislation that will tackle anti-gay discrimination.
Now, some worry that protecting the human rights of the LGBT community is a luxury that only wealthy nations can afford. But in fact, in all countries, there are costs to not protecting these rights, in both gay and straight lives lost to disease and violence, and the silencing of voices and views that would strengthen communities, in ideas never pursued by entrepreneurs who happen to be gay. Costs are incurred whenever any group is treated as lesser or the other, whether they are women, racial, or religious minorities, or the LGBT. Former President Mogae of Botswana pointed out recently that for as long as LGBT people are kept in the shadows, there cannot be an effective public health program to tackle HIV and AIDS. Well, that holds true for other challenges as well. 
The third, and perhaps most challenging, issue arises when people cite religious or cultural values as a reason to violate or not to protect the human rights of LGBT citizens. This is not unlike the justification offered for violent practices towards women like honor killings, widow burning, or female genital mutilation. Some people still defend those practices as part of a cultural tradition. But violence toward women isn’t cultural; it’s criminal. Likewise with slavery, what was once justified as sanctioned by God is now properly reviled as an unconscionable violation of human rights. 
In each of these cases, we came to learn that no practice or tradition trumps the human rights that belong to all of us. And this holds true for inflicting violence on LGBT people, criminalizing their status or behavior, expelling them from their families and communities, or tacitly or explicitly accepting their killing.
Of course, it bears noting that rarely are cultural and religious traditions and teachings actually in conflict with the protection of human rights. Indeed, our religion and our culture are sources of compassion and inspiration toward our fellow human beings. It was not only those who’ve justified slavery who leaned on religion, it was also those who sought to abolish it. And let us keep in mind that our commitments to protect the freedom of religion and to defend the dignity of LGBT people emanate from a common source. For many of us, religious belief and practice is a vital source of meaning and identity, and fundamental to who we are as people. And likewise, for most of us, the bonds of love and family that we forge are also vital sources of meaning and identity. And caring for others is an expression of what it means to be fully human. It is because the human experience is universal that human rights are universal and cut across all religions and cultures.
The fourth issue is what history teaches us about how we make progress towards rights for all. Progress starts with honest discussion. Now, there are some who say and believe that all gay people are pedophiles, that homosexuality is a disease that can be caught or cured, or that gays recruit others to become gay. Well, these notions are simply not true. They are also unlikely to disappear if those who promote or accept them are dismissed out of hand rather than invited to share their fears and concerns. No one has ever abandoned a belief because he was forced to do so.
Universal human rights include freedom of expression and freedom of belief, even if our words or beliefs denigrate the humanity of others. Yet, while we are each free to believe whatever we choose, we cannot do whatever we choose, not in a world where we protect the human rights of all. 
Reaching understanding of these issues takes more than speech. It does take a conversation. In fact, it takes a constellation of conversations in places big and small. And it takes a willingness to see stark differences in belief as a reason to begin the conversation, not to avoid it. 
But progress comes from changes in laws. In many places, including my own country, legal protections have preceded, not followed, broader recognition of rights. Laws have a teaching effect. Laws that discriminate validate other kinds of discrimination. Laws that require equal protections reinforce the moral imperative of equality. And practically speaking, it is often the case that laws must change before fears about change dissipate.
Many in my country thought that President Truman was making a grave error when he ordered the racial desegregation of our military. They argued that it would undermine unit cohesion. And it wasn’t until he went ahead and did it that we saw how it strengthened our social fabric in ways even the supporters of the policy could not foresee. Likewise, some worried in my country that the repeal of “Don’t Ask, Don’t Tell” would have a negative effect on our armed forces. Now, the Marine Corps Commandant, who was one of the strongest voices against the repeal, says that his concerns were unfounded and that the Marines have embraced the change.
Finally, progress comes from being willing to walk a mile in someone else’s shoes. We need to ask ourselves, “How would it feel if it were a crime to love the person I love? How would it feel to be discriminated against for something about myself that I cannot change?” This challenge applies to all of us as we reflect upon deeply held beliefs, as we work to embrace tolerance and respect for the dignity of all persons, and as we engage humbly with those with whom we disagree in the hope of creating greater understanding.
A fifth and final question is how we do our part to bring the world to embrace human rights for all people including LGBT people. Yes, LGBT people must help lead this effort, as so many of you are. Their knowledge and experiences are invaluable and their courage inspirational. We know the names of brave LGBT activists who have literally given their lives for this cause, and there are many more whose names we will never know. But often those who are denied rights are least empowered to bring about the changes they seek. Acting alone, minorities can never achieve the majorities necessary for political change. 
So when any part of humanity is sidelined, the rest of us cannot sit on the sidelines. Every time a barrier to progress has fallen, it has taken a cooperative effort from those on both sides of the barrier. In the fight for women’s rights, the support of men remains crucial. The fight for racial equality has relied on contributions from people of all races. Combating Islamaphobia or anti-Semitism is a task for people of all faiths. And the same is true with this struggle for equality.
Conversely, when we see denials and abuses of human rights and fail to act, that sends the message to those deniers and abusers that they won’t suffer any consequences for their actions, and so they carry on. But when we do act, we send a powerful moral message. Right here in Geneva, the international community acted this year to strengthen a global consensus around the human rights of LGBT people. At the Human Rights Council in March, 85 countries from all regions supported a statement calling for an end to criminalization and violence against people because of their sexual orientation and gender identity. 
At the following session of the Council in June, South Africa took the lead on a resolution about violence against LGBT people. The delegation from South Africa spoke eloquently about their own experience and struggle for human equality and its indivisibility. When the measure passed, it became the first-ever UN resolution recognizing the human rights of gay people worldwide. In the Organization of American States this year, the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights created a unit on the rights of LGBT people, a step toward what we hope will be the creation of a special rapporteur.
Now, we must go further and work here and in every region of the world to galvanize more support for the human rights of the LGBT community. To the leaders of those countries where people are jailed, beaten, or executed for being gay, I ask you to consider this: Leadership, by definition, means being out in front of your people when it is called for. It means standing up for the dignity of all your citizens and persuading your people to do the same. It also means ensuring that all citizens are treated as equals under your laws, because let me be clear – I am not saying that gay people can’t or don’t commit crimes. They can and they do, just like straight people. And when they do, they should be held accountable, but it should never be a crime to be gay. 
And to people of all nations, I say supporting human rights is your responsibility too. The lives of gay people are shaped not only by laws, but by the treatment they receive every day from their families, from their neighbors. Eleanor Roosevelt, who did so much to advance human rights worldwide, said that these rights begin in the small places close to home – the streets where people live, the schools they attend, the factories, farms, and offices where they work. These places are your domain. The actions you take, the ideals that you advocate, can determine whether human rights flourish where you are.
And finally, to LGBT men and women worldwide, let me say this: Wherever you live and whatever the circumstances of your life, whether you are connected to a network of support or feel isolated and vulnerable, please know that you are not alone. People around the globe are working hard to support you and to bring an end to the injustices and dangers you face. That is certainly true for my country. And you have an ally in the United States of America and you have millions of friends among the American people.
The Obama Administration defends the human rights of LGBT people as part of our comprehensive human rights policy and as a priority of our foreign policy. In our embassies, our diplomats are raising concerns about specific cases and laws, and working with a range of partners to strengthen human rights protections for all. In Washington, we have created a task force at the State Department to support and coordinate this work. And in the coming months, we will provide every embassy with a toolkit to help improve their efforts. And we have created a program that offers emergency support to defenders of human rights for LGBT people. 
This morning, back in Washington, President Obama put into place the first U.S. Government strategy dedicated to combating human rights abuses against LGBT persons abroad. Building on efforts already underway at the State Department and across the government, the President has directed all U.S. Government agencies engaged overseas to combat the criminalization of LGBT status and conduct, to enhance efforts to protect vulnerable LGBT refugees and asylum seekers, to ensure that our foreign assistance promotes the protection of LGBT rights, to enlist international organizations in the fight against discrimination, and to respond swiftly to abuses against LGBT persons.
I am also pleased to announce that we are launching a new Global Equality Fund that will support the work of civil society organizations working on these issues around the world. This fund will help them record facts so they can target their advocacy, learn how to use the law as a tool, manage their budgets, train their staffs, and forge partnerships with women’s organizations and other human rights groups. We have committed more than $3 million to start this fund, and we have hope that others will join us in supporting it. 
The women and men who advocate for human rights for the LGBT community in hostile places, some of whom are here today with us, are brave and dedicated, and deserve all the help we can give them. We know the road ahead will not be easy. A great deal of work lies before us. But many of us have seen firsthand how quickly change can come. In our lifetimes, attitudes toward gay people in many places have been transformed. Many people, including myself, have experienced a deepening of our own convictions on this topic over the years, as we have devoted more thought to it, engaged in dialogues and debates, and established personal and professional relationships with people who are gay. 
This evolution is evident in many places. To highlight one example, the Delhi High Court decriminalized homosexuality in India two years ago, writing, and I quote, “If there is one tenet that can be said to be an underlying theme of the Indian constitution, it is inclusiveness.” There is little doubt in my mind that support for LGBT human rights will continue to climb. Because for many young people, this is simple: All people deserve to be treated with dignity and have their human rights respected, no matter who they are or whom they love. 
There is a phrase that people in the United States invoke when urging others to support human rights: “Be on the right side of history.” The story of the United States is the story of a nation that has repeatedly grappled with intolerance and inequality. We fought a brutal civil war over slavery. People from coast to coast joined in campaigns to recognize the rights of women, indigenous peoples, racial minorities, children, people with disabilities, immigrants, workers, and on and on. And the march toward equality and justice has continued. Those who advocate for expanding the circle of human rights were and are on the right side of history, and history honors them. Those who tried to constrict human rights were wrong, and history reflects that as well.
I know that the thoughts I’ve shared today involve questions on which opinions are still evolving. As it has happened so many times before, opinion will converge once again with the truth, the immutable truth, that all persons are created free and equal in dignity and rights. We are called once more to make real the words of the Universal Declaration. Let us answer that call. Let us be on the right side of history, for our people, our nations, and future generations, whose lives will be shaped by the work we do today. I come before you with great hope and confidence that no matter how long the road ahead, we will travel it successfully together. Thank you very much.

Well, I'm happy to be here in New Hampshire for this debate, as we move toward the primary on Tuesday.
I believe that America has the opportunity to once again live by our values, live up to our values in the 21st century, but I think that America can only do that if Americans can succeed. And there are lots of reasons why Americans today are feeling left out and left behind.
Yes, of course, the economy has not been working for most Americans. Yes, of course, we have special interests that are unfortunately doing too much to rig the game.
But there's also the continuing challenges of racism, of sexism, of discrimination against the LGBT community, of the way that we treat people as opposed to how we want to be treated.
I believe that we can get back on the right track. I want to imagine a country where people's wages reflect their hard work, where we have healthcare for everyone, and where every child gets to live up to his or her potential.
Well, let me start by saying that Senator Sanders and I share some very big progressive goals. I've been fighting for universal healthcare for many years, and we're now on the path to achieving it. I don't want us to start over again. I think that would be a great mistake, to once again plunge our country into a contentious debate about whether we should have and what kind of system we should have for healthcare.
I want to build on the progress we've made; got from 90 percent coverage to 100 percent coverage. And I don't want to rip away the security that people finally have; 18 million people now have healthcare; preexisting conditions are no longer a bar. So we have a difference.
I also believe in affordable college, but I don't believe in free college, because every expert that I have talked to says, look, how will you ever control the costs. What I want to do is make sure middle class kids, not Donald Trump's kids, get to be able to afford college. I want to get the economy going again. It's not just enough about what we're against, as important as that is. I have a plan to create new jobs, manufacturing, infrastructure, clean energy jobs that will make us the 21st century clean energy super power. I also want to make sure small businesses can start and grow again.
And of course, I believe in raising the minimum wage and equal pay for work. But the numbers just don't add up, from what Senator Sanders has been proposing. That's why all of the independent experts, all of the editorial boards that have vetted both of us have concluded that it is just not achievable.
Let's go down a path where we can actually tell people what we will do. A progressive is someone who makes progress. That's what I intend to do.
Sanders, Clinton spar on 'progressive' label  
Play Video1:18
If I could just follow up on that.
There is no disagreement between us on universal coverage for health care, the disagreement is where do we start from and where do we end up.
The Republicans want to repeal the Affordable Care Act, I want to improve it. I want to build on it, get the costs down, get prescription drug costs down. Senator Sanders wants us to start all over again. This was a major achievement of President Obama, of our country. It is helping people right now.
I am not going to wait and have us plunge back into a contentious national debate that has very little chance of succeeding. Let's make the Affordable Care Act work for everybody.
Well because I am a progressive who gets things done. And the root of that word, progressive, is progress. But I've heard Senator Sanders comments, and it's really caused me to wonder who's left in the progressive wing of the Democratic Party. Under his definition, President Obama is not progressive because he took donations from Wall Street; Vice President Biden is not progressive because she supported Keystone; Senator Shaheen is not progressive because she supports the trade pact. Even the late, great Senator Paul Wellstone would not fit this definition because he voted for DOMA.
You know, we have differences and, honestly, I think we should be talk about what we want to do for the country. But if we're going to get into labels, I don't think it was particularly progressive to vote against the Brady Bill five times.
Hillary Clinton sure wants you to know she's a 'progressive'  
Play Video0:37
Well, Chuck...
... If I could, you know, in the very first debate I was asked am I a moderate or a progressive and I said I'm a progressive who likes to get things done. Cherry picking a quote here or there doesn't change my record of having fought for racial justice, having fought for kids rights, having fought the kind of inequities that fueled my interest in service in the first place going back to my days in the Children's Defense Fund.
... I think it's important that, look, I understand Senator Sanders really trying to distinguish himself. I understand that, that's what you do in campaigns, but at the same time let's not be -- in, I think an unfair way, making an accusation, or making an attack about where I stand and about where I've always stood.
... Well, you began it yesterday with your comments...
You know, the person who first put out the idea of a 50-state party strategy is former Governor Howard Dean, who is with us tonight.
And I'm very proud and grateful to have the support of so many elected Vermonters and former officials. Two former governors, the current governor, the current other senator. I really appreciate that.
And I think it's because they've worked with me, they've seen what I do. They know what kind of a colleague I am. They want me as their partner in the White House. And that's exactly what I will do.
We'll get things done together. Democrats, Republicans, independents, we're going to make progress together when I'm president.
Well, look, I've got to just jump in here because, honestly, Senator Sanders is the only person who I think would characterize me, a woman running to be the first woman president, as exemplifying the establishment. And I've got to tell you that it is... (APPLAUSE)
It is really quite amusing to me.
People support me because they know me. They know my life's work. They have worked with me and many have also worked with Senator Sanders. And at the end of the day they endorse me because they know I can get things done.
I am not going to make promises I can't keep. I am not going to talk about big ideas like single-payer and then not level with people about how much it will cost.
A respected health economist said that these plans would cost a trillion dollars more a year.
Yeah, but I -- I think it's fair to really ask what's behind that comment. You know, Senator Sanders has said he wants to run a positive campaign. I've tried to keep my disagreements over issues, as it should be.
But time and time again, by innuendo, by insinuation, there is this attack that he is putting forth, which really comes down to -- you know, anybody who ever took donations or speaking fees from any interest group has to be bought.
And I just absolutely reject that, Senator. And I really don't think these kinds of attacks by insinuation are worthy of you. And enough is enough. If you've got something to say, say it directly.
Clinton to Sanders: ‘If you’ve got something to say, say it'  
Play Video0:45
But you will not find that I ever changed a view or a vote because of any donation that I ever received.
And I have stood up and I have represented my constituents to the best of my abilities, and I'm very proud of that.
So I think it's time to end the very artful smear that you and your campaign have been carrying out...
... in recent weeks, and let's talk...
And let's -- let's...
... we both agree with campaign finance reform.
I -- I worked hard for McCain-Feingold.
I want to reverse Citizens United.
And so -- let's talk about issues.
Well, you know, Senator, I don't think -- I don't...
... I don't think you could find any person in political life today who has been subjected to more attacks and had more money spent against her by special interests, among whom you have named a few, than I.
And I'm proud of that. You know, when I took on the drug companies and the insurance companies for universal health care coverage, they went after me with a vengeance.
Today, you've got hedge fund billionaires aligned with Karl Rove, running ads against me to try to get Democrats to vote for you. I know this game. I'm going to stop this game.
But while we're talking about votes, you're the one who voted to deregulate swaps and derivatives in 2000, which contributed to the over-leveraging of Lehman Brothers, which was one of the culprits that brought down the economy.
On the issue of Wall Street.
Well you know, Rachel, I think I may not have done the job I should in explaining my record. You know, I did -- when I left the secretary of State's office, like so many former officials, military leaders, journalists, others, I did go on the speaking circuit. I spoke to heart doctors, I spoke to the American Camping Association, I spoke to auto dealers, and yes, I spoke to firms on Wall Street. They wanted me to talk about the world, what my experience had been as secretary of State.
But what I want people to know is I went to Wall Street before the crash. I was the one saying you're going to wreck the economy because of these shenanigans with mortgages. I called to end the carried interest loophole that hedge fund managers enjoy. I proposed changes in CEO compensation.
I called for a consumer protection financial bureau before it was created. And I think the best evidence that the Wall Street people at least know where I stand and where I have always stood is because they are trying to beat me in this primary. They have collected and spent as much as $6 million on these ads. Hedge fund billionaires, Karl Rove, another billionaire, jumped in.
And why are they doing that? These are guys who try to make smart investments. They know my record, they know me, they know that I say what I believe and I will do it. And I also have a pretty good understanding about how to stop them.
If I could, let me just say that of course it has to change. It has to change. And that's why I have put forward a plan to do just that. And it's been judged to be the toughest, most effective and comprehensive one.
I have great respect for Senator Sanders's commitment to try to restore Glass-Steagall. But I do not believe that that is enough. And in fact, I don't believe it really addresses a lot of the biggest issues we have.
You know, we now have power under the Dodd-Frank legislation to break up banks. And I've said I will use that power if they pose a systemic risk. But I want to go further, because it was investment banks, it was insurance companies, it was mortgage companies, all of which contributed.
Look we have a law -- look, you know, I -- I appreciate the senator's advocacy. We have a law. It was passed. It was signed by President Obama. It lays out a process that you go through to determine whether a systemic risk is posed.
And by the way, President Obama signed that, pushed it through, even though he took donations from Wall Street, because he's a responsible president. So we have a law in place. If the circumstances warrant it, I will certainly use it. And from what you say, I know you will as well.
But that is not enough. And I keep going back to this because part of the reason the Wall Street guys are trying so hard to stop me -- the hedge fund guys, the shadow banking guys -- is because I've got their number on all of that. And my plan goes so much further to try to prevent the problems of the future.
You know, we can't just fight the last war. We've got to be prepared to stop these guys if they ever try to use their economic power once again, to hurt the economy, and to hurt so many Americans. And my plan, Paul Krugman, Barney Frank, a lot of experts who understand what the new challenges might be, have said I am exactly on point, and the Wall Street guys actually know that.
I will look into it. I don't know the status, but I will certainly look into it. But, I can only repeat what is the fact that I spoke to a lot of different groups with a lot of different constituents, a lot of different kinds of members about issues that had to do with world affairs. I probably described more times than I can remember how stressful it was advising the President about going after Bin Laden.
... Well, Senator, no one wants to see that happen. I mean, look, I care deeply about this because just like you I have met so many people who had their life savings wiped out, who lost their homes, who are barely back with their heads above water.
This was a disaster for our country, and we can never let that happen again. We have no disagreement about this. But, I think it's a broader target list than just Wall Street, and I believe that we have to be very focused on how we try to take back the power and increase the empowerment of the American people. And, I think I have that kind of experience, maybe because they've beat me up for so many years, and I know exactly how to handle them because I've been in the arena with them time and time again.
Well, I think what the president understands, and what he's trying to do, is that we have to support the Arab and Kurdish fighters on the ground who are actually doing the fighting.
I agree with the president. I've said myself, we will not send American combat troops back to either Syria or Iraq -- that is off the table.
But we do have special forces, we do have trainers, we do have the military personnel who are helping with the airstrikes that the United States is leading so that we can try to take out ISIS infrastructure, take out their leadership.
And I think that, given the threat that ISIS poses to the region and beyond, as we have sadly seen in our own country, it is important to keep the Iraqi army on a path where they can actually take back territory, to work with the Sunni tribes in Anbar province and elsewhere so that their fighters can be also deployed, to work with the Kurds to provide them the support, but they're doing the fighting. We're doing the support and enabling.
And I also think we've got to do more to stop foreign fighters, foreign funding and take ISIS on online, as well as doing everything necessary to keep us safe at home.
No. I mean, of course that's a theoretical question, and we don't know what it would be for, and we don't know how many numbers there are. I am against American combat troops being in Syria and Iraq.
I support special forces. I support trainers. I support the air campaign. And I think we're making some progress. I want to continue to intensify that, and that's exactly what the president is doing.
If I could -- if I could...
... respectfully add -- look, we did differ. A vote in 2002 is not a plan to defeat ISIS. We have to look at the threats that we face right now...
Oh, absolutely. The president decided to leave more troops than he had originally planned in Afghanistan. We have a very cooperative government there, with Ashraf Ghani and his top -- his top partner, Abdullah. And they are doing their very best. And the Afghan army is actually fighting. The Afghan army is taking heavy losses defending Afghan territory.
And I would have to make an evaluation based on the circumstances at the time I took office as to how much help they continue to need. Because it's not just the Taliban. We now are seeing outposts of, you know, fighters claiming to be affiliated with ISIS.
So, we've got this arc of instability from North Africa to South Asia, and we have to pay close attention to it. And we have to build coalitions, something that I did to take on the Iranian nuclear program, and what I will do as president to make sure that we defeat these terrorist networks.
A group of national security experts, military intelligence experts, issued a very concerning statement about Senator Sanders's views on foreign policy and national security, pointing out some of the comments he has made on these issues, such as inviting Iranian troops into Syria to try to resolve the conflict there; putting them right at the doorstep of Israel. Asking Saudi Arabia and Iran to work together, when they can't stand each other and are engaged in a proxy battle right at this moment.
So I do think questions have been raised and questions have to be answered because when New Hampshire voters go on Tuesday to cast your vote, you are voting both for a president and a commander in chief. And there is no way to predict what comes in the door of that White House from day to day that can pose a threat to the United States or one of our friends and allies, and I think this is a big part of the job interview that we are all conducting with the voters here.
Well, let me just add that, you know, I've said this before and I'm very proud of it, that when it comes to judgment, having run a hard race against Senator Obama at the time, he turned to me to be secretary of State. And when it comes to the biggest counterterrorism issues that we faced in this administration, namely whether or not to go after bin Laden, I was at that table, I was exercising my judgment to advise the president on what to do, on that, on Iran, on Russia on China, on a whole raft of issues.
Because I know from my own experience that you've got to be ready on day one. There is just too much unpredictable threat and danger in the world today, you know, to try to just say wait, I'll get to that when I can. That is just not an acceptable approach.
Absolutely. You know, I did put together the coalition to impose sanctions. I actually started the negotiations that led to the nuclear agreement, sending some much my closest aides to begin the conversations with the Iranians.
Well Senator, let me just correct the record if I can. You know -- let me correct the record.
As I -- as I certainly recall, the question was to meet with without conditions. And you're right, I was against that. I was against it then I would be against it now.
Part of diplomacy, the hard work of diplomacy is trying to extract whatever concessions you can get, and giving something the other side wants. Of course you've got to try to make peace with, and work with those who are your adversaries, but you don't just rush in, open the door, and say, "Here I am. Let's talk and make a deal."
That's not the way it works.
... Well, we set conditions on Iran. We worked hard to get them established, and to be enforced, and then we talked. That's exactly the right...
... And, that's what I did with the President, so he and I are on the very same page.
I haven't talked to Secretary Carter, but here's what I would think he's planning. We do have the nuclear weapons agreement with Iran, that's an enforcement consequence, action for action, follow on. We have a plan, we will watch them, we will be vigilant.
Well, first of all, I'm absolutely against privatizing the V.A. And I am going do everything I can to build on the reforms that Senator Sanders and others in Congress have passed to try to fix what's wrong with the V.A.
There are a lot of issues about wait times and services that have to be fixed because our veterans deserve nothing but the best.
But you're absolutely right, you know, Rachel, this is another part of the Koch brothers agenda. They've actually formed an organization to try to begin to convince Americans we should no longer have guaranteed health care, specialized care for our veterans.
I will fight that as hard as I can. I think there's where we can enlist the veterans service organizations, the veterans of America, because, yes, let's fix the V.A., but we will never let it be privatized, and that is a promise.
Whatever they decide to do, that's fine.
All right.
I can only tell you what I believe, and that is that I am the strongest candidate to take it to the Republicans and win in November.
Absolutely I can. You know, before it was emails, it was Benghazi, and the Republicans were stirring up so much controversy about that. And I testified for 11 hours, answered their questions. They basically said yeah, didn't get her. We tried. That was all a political ploy.
Now, we had a development in the email matter today when it came out that Secretary Powell and close aides to Former Secretary Rice used private e-mail accounts. and now you have these people in the government who are doing the same thing to Secretary Powell and Secretary Rice's aide they've been doing to me, which is that I never sent or received any classified material. They are retroactively classifying it.
I agree completely with Secretary Powell, who said today this is an absurdity. And so I think the American people will know it's an absurdity. I have absolutely no concerns about it whatsoever.
I am 100 percent confident. This is a security review that was requested. It is being carried out. It will be resolved. But I have to add if there's going to be a security review about me, there's going to have to be security reviews about a lot of other people, including Republican office holders, because we've got this absurd situation of retroactive classifications.
Honest to goodness, this is -- this just beggars the imagination. So I have absolutely no concerns about it, but we've got to get to the bottom of what's really going on here, and I hope that will happen.
No.
Yes, I do. And -- you know, what I hope the Supreme Court will do is make it absolutely clear that any state that continues capital punishment either must meet the highest standards of evidentiary (ph) proof of effective assistance of counsel or they cannot continue it because that, to me, is the real dividing line.
I have much more confidence in the federal system, and I do reserve it for particularly heinous crimes in the federal system, like terrorism. I have strong feelings about that. I thought it was appropriate after a very thorough trial that Timothy McVeigh received the death penalty for blowing up the Federal Building in Oklahoma City, killing 168 people, including 19 children in a daycare center.
I do for very limited, particularly heinous crimes believe it is an appropriate punishment, but I deeply disagree with the way that too many states are still implementing it. If it were possible to separate the federal from the state system by the Supreme Court, that would, I think, be an appropriate outcome.
Absolutely. Absolutely. You know, Rachel, you and I have talked about this before. I thank you for going to Flint to hold that town hall. I will be in Flint at the Mayor's invitation on Sunday to get an in depth briefing about what is, and is not happening.
This is an emergency. Everyday that goes by that these people, particularly the children, are not tested so we can know what steps must be taken to try to remediate the effects of the poisoning that they have been living with is a day lost in a child's life. I know from the work that I've done over so many years, lead, the toxic nature of lead can affect you brain development, your body development, your behavior.
I absolutely believe that what is being done is not sufficient. We need to be absolutely clear about everything that should be done from today to tomorrow, into the future to try to remedy the terrible burden that the people of Flint are barring. That includes fixing their pipes, it includes guaranteeing whatever healthcare and educational embellishments they may need going forward, and I think the federal government has way where it can bill the state of Michigan. If Michigan won't do it, there have to be ways that we can begin to move, and then make them pay for it, and hold them accountable.
You know, Chuck, I've only had responsibility for voting for trade agreements as a senator. And I voted a multinational trade agreement when I was senator, the CAFTA agreement, because I did not believe it was in the best interests of the workers of America, of our incomes, and I opposed it.
I did hope that the TPP, negotiated by this administration, would put to rest a lot of the concerns that many people have expressed about trade agreements. And I said that I was holding out that hope that it would be the kind of trade agreement that I was looking for.
I waited until it had actually been negotiated because I did want to give the benefit of the doubt to the administration. Once I saw what the outcome was, I opposed it.
Now I have a very clear view about this. We have to trade with the rest of the world. We are 5 percent of the world's population. We have to trade with the other 95 percent. And trade has to be reciprocal. That's the way the global economy works.
But we have failed to provide the basic safety net support that American workers need in order to be able to compete and win in the global economy. So it's not just what's in the trade agreement that I'm interested in.
I did help to renegotiate the trade agreement that we inherited from President Bush with Korea. We go the UAW on board because of changes we made. So there are changes that I believe would make a real difference if they could be achieved, but I do not currently support it as it is written.
Well, I -- I don't accept that premise, Chuck. I think that we've got so much business we have to do. We've talked a lot tonight about what we're against -- we're against income inequality. We're against the abuses of powerful interests. We're against a lot of things.
The answer to both of those is no. I'm interested in making what we have work better. I want to streamline programs that are duplicative and redundant. I want to have a top-to-bottom review about what works and what doesn't work, and be absolutely clear we're getting rid of what doesn't work.
I have had the opportunity to run a big agency. I was very flattered when Henry Kissinger said I ran the State Department better -- better than anybody had run it in a long time. So I have an idea of what it's going to take to make our government work more efficiently.
And when you put together a budget, you have to make a lot of hard decisions, but I think it's not appropriate to say "I'm going to get rid of this, get rid of that" until you have a very good process that gives you the information about what to do.
But I want to add something else, you know, because look, we have so much work to do in our country, and I think it's the greatest work that Americans will be called to do. And of course, we have to have people in every community involved in it. We have to have the political voice, the political grassroots speaking up and speaking out about what we have to try to accomplish in Washington.
But we also need to have a very clear set of goals that we are going to achieve, and we need to level with the American people about what they are, what they will cost, what will be expected of our citizenry. So I see as president having a constant dialogue with Americans here's what we're trying to get done, here's why I need your help, here's why you may think comprehensive immigration reform with a path to citizenship isn't something you care about, but I'm telling you it will help fix the labor market, it will bring people out of the shadows --
-- it will actually raise wages. You have to make all those connections so that you've got people with you every step of the way. That's what I want to do.
I never said that.
Look --
Well, I'm certainly going to unite the party, but I'm not -- I'm not getting ahead of myself. I think that would be a little bit presumptuous. If I'm so fortunate as to be the nominee, the first person I will call to talk to about where we go and how we get it done will be Senator Sanders.
That's true. That's true.
Well first, thanks to MSNBC and thanks to all of you for holding this debate before the New Hampshire primary. I am going to campaign as hard as I can between now and Tuesday to earn your votes in that primary, and I hear some talk that people are trying to decide do they vote with their heart, do they vote with their head, I'm asking you to bring both your heart and your head to vote with you on Tuesday because we have a lot of work that can only come because your heart is moved.
You know, we didn't get to talk about the continuing struggles that Americans face with racism, with sexism, with discrimination against the LGBT community, with new Americans, with people with disabilities. Yes, we have income inequality, we have other forms of inequality that we need to stand up against and absolutely diminish from our society.

Well, good evening. And I want to thank the Congressional Black Caucus Institute and the people of Charleston for hosting us here on the eve of Martin Luther King Day tomorrow.
You know, I remember well when my youth minister took me to hear Dr. King. I was a teenager. And his moral clarity, the message that he conveyed that evening really stayed with me and helped to set me on a path to service. I also remember that he spent the last day of his life in Memphis, fighting for dignity and higher pay for working people.
And that is our fight still. We have to get the economy working and incomes rising for everyone, including those who have been left out and left behind. We have to keep our communities and our country safe. We need a president who can do all aspects of the job.
I understand that this is the hardest job in the world. I'm prepared and ready to take it on and I hope to earn your support to be the nominee of the Democratic Party and the next president of the United States.
I would work quickly to present to the Congress my plans for creating more good jobs in manufacturing, infrastructure, clean and renewable energy, raising the minimum wage, and guaranteeing, finally, equal pay for women's work.
I would also...
Yes look, I have made it clear based on Senator Sanders' own record that he has voted with the NRA, with the gun lobby numerous times. He voted against the Brady Bill five times. He voted for what we call, the Charleston Loophole. He voted for immunity from gunmakers and sellers which the NRA said, "was the most important piece of gun legislation in 20 years. "
Well, sadly it's reality, and it has been heartbreaking, and incredibly outraging to see the constant stories of young men like Walter Scott, as you said, who have been killed by police officers. Their needs to be a concerted effort to address the systemic racism in our criminal justice system.
And, that requires a very clear, agenda for retraining police officers, looking at ways to end racial profiling, finding more ways to really bring the disparities that stalk our country into high relief.
One out of three African American men may well end up going to prison. That's the statistic. I want people hear to think what we would be doing if it was one out of three white men, and very often, the black men are arrested, convicted and incarcerated ...
Well, Lester, you're right. Everywhere I go to campaign, I'm meeting families who are affected by the drug problem that mostly is opioids and heroin now, and lives are being lost and children are being orphaned. And I've met a lot of grandparents who are now taking care of grandchildren.
So this is the kind of approach that we should take in dealing with what is now...
... a growing epidemic.
Well, Andrea, I am absolutely committed to universal health care. I have worked on this for a long time, people may remember that I took on the health insurance industry back in the '90s, and I didn't quit until we got the children's health insurance program that ensures eight million kids.
And I certainly respect Senator Sanders' intentions, but when you're talking about health care, the details really matter. And therefore, we have been raising questions about the nine bills that he introduced over 20 years, as to how they would work and what would be the impact on people's health care?
But -- Senator Sanders, if I can...
You know, I have to say I'm not sure whether we're talking about the plan you just introduced tonight, or we're talking about the plan you introduced nine times in the Congress. But the fact is, we have the Affordable Care Act. That is one of the greatest accomplishments of President Obama, of the Democratic Party, and of our country.
Now, there are things we can do to improve it, but to tear it up and start over again, pushing our country back into that kind of a contentious debate, I think is the wrong direction.
And that's exactly what we are able to do based on the foundation of the Affordable Care Act -- what Governor O'Malley just said is one of the models that we will be looking at to make sure we do get costs down, we do limit a lot of the unnecessary costs that we still have in the system.
But, with all due respect, to start over again with a whole new debate is something that I think would set us back. The Republicans just voted last week to repeal the Affordable Care Act, and thank goodness, President Obama vetoed it and saved Obamacare for the American people.
Well, as someone who -- as someone who has a little bit of experience standing up to the health insurance industry, that spent, you know...
Well, I think it's an important point the president made in his State of the Union. And here's what I would say. I will go anywhere, to meet with anyone, at any time to find common ground.
That's what I did as a first lady, when I worked with both Democrats and Republicans to get the Children's Health Insurance Program, when I worked with Tom DeLay, one of the most partisan of Republicans, to reform the adoption and foster care system.
What I did, working in the Senate, where I crossed the aisle often, working even with the senator from South Carolina, Lindsey Graham, to get Tricare for national guardsmen and women.
And it's what I did as Secretary of State, on numerous occasions, and most particularly, rounding up two-thirds votes in order to pass a treaty that lowered the nuclear weapons in both Russia and the United States.
So I know it's hard, but I also know you've got to work at it every single day. I look out here, I see a lot of my friends from the Congress. And I know that they work at it every single day.
Because maybe you can't only find a little sliver of common ground to cooperate with somebody from the other party, but who knows. If you're successful there, maybe you can build even more. That's what I would do.
Well thanks for the question and congratulations on five million viewers on YouTube, that's quite an accomplishment. Look, this election is mostly about the future and therefore it is of greatest urgency for young people.
I've laid out my ideas about what we can do to make college affordable; how we can help people pay off their student debts and save thousands of dollars, how we can create more good jobs because a lot of the young people that I talk with are pretty disappointed the economic prospects they feel their facing. So making community college free, making it possible to attend a public college or university with debt free tuition, looking for ways to protect our rights especially from the concerted Republican assault; on voting rights, on women's rights, on gay rights, on civil rights, on workers rights.
And I know how much young people value their independence, their autonomy, and their rights. So I think this is an election where we have to pull young people and older people together to have a strategy about how we're going to encourage even more American's to vote because it absolutely clear to me...
That turning over our White House to the Republicans would be bad for everybody especially young people.
Look, I have the greatest respect for Senator Sanders and for his supports and I'm going to keep working as hard as I can to reach as many people of all ages about what I will do, what the experience and the ideas that I have that I will bring to the White House and I hope to have their support when I'm the Democratic nominee.
Well, there's no daylight on the basic premise that there should be no bank too big to fail and no individual too powerful to jail. We agree on that. But where we disagree is the comments that Senator Sanders has made that don't just affect me, I can take that, but he's criticized President Obama for taking donations from Wall Street, and President Obama has led our country out of the great recession.
Senator Sanders called him weak, disappointing. He even, in 2011, publicly sought someone to run in a primary against President Obama. Now, I personally believe that President Obama's work to push through the Dodd- Frank...
You know, I think since -- since Senator Standers followed up on this...
Your profusion of comments about your feelings towards President Obama are a little strange given what you said about him in 2011.
But look, I have a plan that most commentators have said is tougher, more effective, and more comprehensive.
It builds on the Dodd-Frank -- yes, it is. It builds on the Dodd-Frank, regulatory scheme...
... but it goes much further, because...
... both the governor and the senator have focused only on the big banks. Lehman Brothers, AIG, the shadow banking sector were as big a problem in what caused the Great Recession, I go after them.
And I can tell you that the hedge fund billionaires who are running ads against me right now, and Karl Rove, who started running an ad against me right now, funded by money from the financial services sector, sure thing, I'm the one they don't want to be up against.
Yes, well, first of all -- first of all, Paul Krugman, Barney Frank, others have all endorsed my plan. Secondly, we have Dodd-Frank. It gives us the authority already to break up big banks that pose...
That pose a risk to the financial sector. I want to go further and add to that.
And, you know, Governor, you have raised money on Wall Street. You raised a lot of money on Wall Street when you were the head of the Democratic Governor's Association...
Yes, well, the point is that if we're going to be serious about this and not just try to score political points, we should know what's in Dodd-Frank, and what's in Dodd-Frank already gives the president the authority...
... with his regulators to make those decisions.
Well, the last point on this is, Senator Sanders, you're the only one on this stage that voted to deregulate the financial market in 2000, to take the cops off the street, to use Governor O'Malley's phrase, to make the SEC and the Commodities Futures Trading Commission no longer able to regulate swaps and derivatives, which were one of the main cause of the collapse in '08.
There's plenty of problems that we all have to face together.
And the final thing I would say, we're at least having a vigorous debate about reining in Wall Street...
... The Republicans want to give them more power, and repeal Dodd-Frank. That's what we need to stop...
Well, I have actually documented every way that I'm going to pay for what I'm doing because I think the American public deserves to know. And, you can go to my website and actually see that.
But, there are serious questions about how we're going to pay for what we want to see our country do. And, I'm the only candidate standing here tonight who has said I will not raise taxes on the middle class. I want to raise incomes, not taxes, and I'm going to do everything I can to make sure that the wealthy pay for debt free tuition, for child care, for paid family leave. To help us bring down student debt we're going to refinance that student debt, saving kids thousands of dollars.
Yeah, and that will also come out of the -- some of the pockets of people in the financial services industry...
But I will tell you exactly how I pay for everything I've proposed...
And let me...
Well, I'm very proud of the Iran Nuclear Agreement. I was very pleased to be part of what the president put into action when he took office. I was responsible for getting those sanctions imposed which put the pressure on Iran. It brought them to the negotiating table which resulted in this agreement.
And so, they have been so far, following their requirements under the agreement. But I think we still have to carefully watch them. We've had one good day over 36 year and I think we need more good days before we move more rapidly toward any kind of normalization. And we have to be sure that they are truly going to implement the agreement. And then, we have to go after them on a lot of their other bad behavior in the region which is causing enormous problems in Syria, Yemen, Iraq and elsewhere.
Absolutely not.
I have a three point plan that does not include American Ground forces. It includes the United States leading an air coalition which is what we're doing, supporting fighters on the ground; the Iraqi Army which is beginning to show more ability, the Sunni fighters that we are now helping to reconstitute and Kurdish on both sides of the border.
I think we also have try to disrupt their supply chain of foreign fighters and foreign money and we do have to contest them in online space. So I'm very committed to both going after ISIS but also supporting what Secretary Kerry is doing to try to move on a political diplomatic to try to begin to slow down and hopefully end the carnage in Syria which is the root of so many of the problems that we seen in the region and beyond.
Look, I think that the president's decision to go after the chemical weapons once there was a potential opportunity to build on when the Russians opened that door resulted in a very positive outcome. We were able to get the chemical weapons out.
I know from my own experience as secretary of State that we were deeply worried about Assad's forces using chemical weapons because it would have had not only a horrific affect on people in Syria, but it could very well have affected the surrounding states, Jordan, Israel, Lebanon, Turkey. So getting those chemical weapons out was a big deal, but...
Well -- but -- but...
I think, as commander in chief, you've got to constantly be evaluating the decisions you have to make. I know a little bit about this, having spent many hours in the situation room, advising President Obama.
And I want to just add to something that Senator Sanders said, the United States had a very big interest in trying to help stabilize the region. If there is any blame to be spread around, it starts with the prime minister of Iraq, who sectarianized his military, setting Shia against Sunni.
... and go after ISIS, which I don't think would be a good idea.
But overall, a lot of the forces at work in the region are ones that we cannot directly influence, but we can...
Well, it would depend on what I got for it and I can tell you what we got in the first term, we got a new start treaty to reduce nuclear weapons between the United States and Russia. We got permission to resupply our troops in Afghanistan by traveling across Russia.
Well, my relationship with him, it's -- it's interesting.
Oh, we're breaking? OK.
Well, I wanted to say, and I'll do it quickly, I was very pleased that leaders of President Obama's administration went out to Silicon Valley last week and began exactly this conversation about what we can do, consistent with privacy and security.
That is not what I've heard. Let me leave it at that.
Well, it'll start at the kitchen table, we'll see how it goes from there. And I...
Well Lester, I spent a lot of time last week being outraged by what's happening in Flint, Michigan and I think every single American should be outraged. We've had a city in the United States of America where the population which is poor in many ways and majority African American has been drinking and bathing in lead contaminated water. And the governor of that state acted as though he didn't really care.
I want to be a president who takes care of the big problems and the problems that are affecting the people of our country everyday.

Well, this is a contested campaign. And as I have said many times, I have a great deal of respect for Senator Obama. But we have differences.
And in the last several days, some of those differences in tactics and the choices that Senator Obama's campaign has made regarding flyers and mailers and other information that has been put out about my health care plan and my position on NAFTA have been very disturbing to me.
And, therefore, I think it's important that you stand up for yourself and you point out these differences so that voters can have the information they need to make a decision.
You know, for example, it's been unfortunate that Senator Obama has consistently said that I would force people to have health care whether they could afford it or not.
You know, health care reform and achieving universal health care is a passion of mine. It is something I believe in with all my heart.
And every day that I'm campaigning -- and certainly here throughout Ohio, I've met so many families, happened again this morning in Lorain, who are just devastated because they don't get the health care they deserve to have.
And, unfortunately, it's a debate we should have that is accurate and is based in facts about my plan and Senator Obama's plan, because my plan will cover everyone and it will be affordable. And on many occasions, independent experts have concluded exactly that.
And Senator Obama's plan does not cover everyone. It would leave, give or take, 15 million people out. 
So we should have a good debate that uses accurate information, not false, misleading and discredited information, especially on something as important as whether or not we will achieve quality, affordable health care for everyone.
That's my goal. That's what I'm fighting for and I'm going to stand up for that.
Well, so far as I know, it did not and I certainly know nothing about it and have made clear that that's not the kind of behavior that I condone or expect from the people working in my campaign.
But we have no evidence where it came from. So I think that it's clear what I would do if it were someone in my campaign, as I have in the past, asking people to leave my campaign if they do things that I disagree with.
I have to...
I have to respond to that, because this is not just any issue and certainly we've had a vigorous back-and-forth on both sides of our campaign.
But this is an issue that goes to the heart of whether or not this country will finally do what is right, and that is to provide quality, affordable health care to every single person.
Senator Obama has a mandate in his plan. It's a mandate on parents to provide health insurance for their children. That's about 150 million people who would be required to do that.
The difference between Senator Obama and myself is that I know from the work I've done on health care for many years that if everyone's not in the system, we will continue to let the insurance companies do what's called cherry picking, pick those who get insurance and leave others out. We will continue to have a hidden tax so that when someone goes to the emergency room without insurance, 15 million or however many, that amount of money that will be used to take care of that person will be then spread among all the rest of us.
And most importantly, you know, the kind of attack on my health care plan which the University of Pennsylvania and others have said is misleading, that attack goes right to the heart of whether or not we will be able to achieve universal health care. That's a core Democratic Party value. It's something that ever since Harry Truman we have stood for.
And what I find regrettable is that in Senator Obama's mailing that he has sent out across Ohio, it is almost as though the health insurance companies and the Republicans wrote it, because in my plan there is enough money, according to the independent experts who have evaluated it, to provide the kind of subsidies so that everyone would be able to afford it. It is not the same as a single state trying to do this, because the federal government has many more resources at its disposal.
So I think it's imperative that we stand as Democrats for universal health care. I've staked out a claim for that. Senator Edwards did. Others have. But Senator Obama has not.
You know, Brian...
Brian, wait a minute. I've got -- this is too important. 
You know, Senator Obama has a mandate. He would enforce the mandate by requiring parents to buy insurance for their children.
That is the case. If you have a mandate, it has to be enforceable. So there's no difference here. It's just that I know...
... that parents who get sick have terrible consequences for their children. So you can insure the children, and then you've got the breadwinner who can't afford health insurance or doesn't have it for him or herself.
And, in fact, it would be as though Franklin Roosevelt said, let's make Social Security voluntary. That's, you know -- that's -- let's let everybody get in it if they can afford it. Or if President Johnson said, let's make Medicare voluntary.
What we have said is at the point of employment, at the point of contact with various government agencies, we would have people signed up. It's like when you get a 401(k) at your employer, the employer automatically enrolls you.
You would be enrolled. And under my plan, it is affordable because, number one, we have enough money in our plan. 
A comparison of the plans like the ones we're proposing found that actually I would cover nearly everybody at a much lower cost than Senator Obama's plan because we would not only provide these health care tax credits, but I would limit the amount of money that anyone ever has to pay for a premium to a low percentage of your income. So it will be affordable.
Now, if you want to say that we shouldn't try to get everyone into health insurance, that's a big difference, because I believe if we don't have universal health care, we will never provide prevention.
I have the most aggressive measures to reduce cost and improve quality. And, time and time again, people who have compared our two approaches have concluded that. So let's have a debate about the facts.
About 20 percent of the people who are uninsured have the means to buy insurance. They're often young people who think they're immortal...
... except when the illness or the accident strikes. And what Senator Obama has said, that then, once you get to the hospital, you'll be forced to buy insurance, I don't think that's a good idea. We ought to plan for it, and we ought to make sure we cover everyone. That is the only way to get to universal health care coverage.
That is what I've worked for, for 15 years...
... and I believe that we can achieve it. But if we don't even have a plan to get there and we start out by leaving people, you'll never, ever control costs, improve quality, and cover everyone.
Well, there's hardly anything more important. I think it would be good to talk about health care

I am a real person with all the pluses and minuses that go along with that.
I'm running to help American families get a raise.
We are dead wrong for 21st century America. We're going forward, we're not going back.
[Video ends]
Well, our prayers are with the people of France tonight. But that is not enough. We need to have a resolve that will bring the world together to root out the kind of radical jihadist ideology that motivates organizations like ISIS, the barbaric, ruthless, violence jihadist, terrorist group.
This election is not only about electing a president. It's also about choosing our next commander in chief. And I will be laying out in detail what I think we need to do with our friends and allies in Europe and elsewhere to do a better job of coordinating efforts against the scourge of terrorism. Our country deserves no less because all of the other issues we wanna deal with depend on us being secure and strong.
Well, John I think that-- we have to look at ISIS as the leading threat of an international terror network. It cannot be contained, it must be defeated. There is no question in my mind that if we summon our resources, both our leadership resources and all of the tools at our disposal, not just military force which should be used as a last resort, but our diplomacy, our development aid, law enforcement, sharing of intelligence in a much more-- open and cooperative way-- that we can bring people together.
But it cannot be an American fight. And I think what the president has consistently said-- which I agree with-- is that we will support those who take the fight to ISIS. That is why we have troops in Iraq that are helping to train and build back up the Iraqi military, why we have special operators in Syria working with the Kurds and Arabs so that we can be supportive. But this cannot be an American fight, although American leadership is essential.
Well, John, look, I think that what happened when we abided by the agreement that George W. Bush-- made with the Iraqis to leave-- by 2011 is that an Iraqi army was left that had been trained and that was prepared to defend Iraq. Unfortunately, Nouri al-Maliki, the prime minister, set about decimating it.
And then with the revolution against Assad-- and I did early on say we needed to try to find a way to train and equip moderates very early so that we would have a better idea of how to deal with Assad because I thought there would be-- extremist groups filling the vacuum.
So, yes, this has developed. I think that there are many other reasons why it has in addition-- to what happened in the region. But I don't think that the United States-- has the bulk of the responsibility. I really put that on Assad and on the Iraqis and on the region itself.
Thank you, John, well, I think it's important we put this in historic context. United States has unfortunately been victimized by terrorism going back decades. In the 1980s it was in Beirut, Lebanon under President Reagan's administration and 258 Americans, marines, embassy personnel and others were-- murdered.
We also had attacks on two of our embassies in-- Tanzania and Kenya-- when my husband was president. Again, Americans murdered. And then of course 9/11 happened which happened before there was an invasion of Iraq. I have said the invasion of Iraq was a mistake. But I think if we're ever gonna really tackle the problems posed by jihadi extreme terrorism we need to understand it and realize that it had-- ans-- and antecedence to what happened in Iraq and we have to continue to be vigilant about it.
Well, and-- and of course each of these cases needs to be looked at individually and analyzed. Part of the problem that we have currently in the Middle East is that Assad has hung onto power-- with the very strong support of Russia and Iran and with the proxy of-- Hezbollah-- being there basically fighting his battles.
So I don't think you can paint with a broad brush. This is an incredibly complicated region of the world. It's become more complicated. And many of the fights that are going on are not ones that the United States has either started or have a role in. The Shia-- Sunni split, the dictatorships that have suppressed people's aspirations, the increasing globalization without any real safety valve for people to have a better life. We saw that in Egypt. We saw a dictator overthrown, we saw Muslim Brotherhood president installed and then we saw him ousted and the army back. So I think we've got to understand the complexity of the world that we are facing and no places more so than in the Middle East.
Well, I think--
I-- I think that is very unfair to a few that you mentioned-- most particularly Jordan which has put a lot on the line for the United States. It's also taken in hundreds of thousands of refugees from Syria and has been therefore subjected to threats and attacks-- by extremists themselves.
Well, we did have a plan. And I think it's-- fair to say that-- of all of the Arab leaders Gaddafi probably had more blood on his hands of Americans than anybody else. And when he moved on his own people threatening-- a massacre, a genocide-- the Europeans and the Arabs, our allies and partners-- did ask for American help. And we provided it. And we didn't put a single boot on the ground. And-- Gaddafi was deposed.
The Libyans turned out for one of the most successful fairest elections that any Arab country has had. They elected moderate leaders. Now there has been a lot of turmoil and trouble as they have tried to deal with these radical elements which you find in this arc of instability from North Africa to Afghanistan. And it is imperative that we do more-- not only to help our friends and partners protect themselves and protect our own homeland-- but also to work to try to deal with this arc of instability which does have a lot of impact on what happens in a country like Libya.
Well, I think it's perfectly-- fair to say that we invested quite a bit in development aid. Some of the bravest people that I had the privilege of working with as secretary of state were our development professionals who went sometimes alone, sometimes with our military into very dangerous places in Iraq, in Afghanistan-- elsewhere. So there does need to be a whole of government approach. But just because we're involved and we have a strategy doesn't mean we're going to be able to dictate the outcome. These are often very long-term kinds of-- investments that--
Yes.
I don't think we're at war with Islam. I don't think we're at war with all Muslims. I think we're at war with jihadists who have--
I-- I think that you can-- you can talk about Islamists who-- clearly are also jihadists. But I think it's-- it-- it's not particularly helpful to make the case that-- Senator Sanders was just making that I agree with that we've gotta reach out to Muslim countries. We've gotta have them be part of our coalition.
If they hear people running for-- president who basically shortcut it to say we are somehow against Islam-- that was one of the real contributions-- despite all the other problems that George W. Bush made after 9/11 when he basically said after going to a mosque in Washington, "We are not at war with Islam or Muslims. We are at war with violent extremism. We are at war with people who use their religion for purposes of power and oppression." And yes, we are at war with those people but I don't want us to be painting with too broad a brush.
I think with this kind of barbarism and nihilism-- it's very hard to understand other than the lust for power, the rejection of (unintel), the total disregard for human life-- freedom or any other value that we know and-- respect.
Historically it is important to try to understand your adversary in order to figure out how they are thinking, what they will be doing, how they will react. I-- I plead -- that it's very difficult when you deal with-- ISIS and organizations like that whose-- whose behavior is so barbaric and so vicious-- that it doesn't seem to have any purpose other than lust for killing and power. And that's very difficult to put ourselves in other shoes.
Well, we-- we have an authorization to use military force against terrorists. We-- passed it after 9/11.
It-- it certainly does cover it. I-- I would like to see it updated.
No. It would have to go through the Congress. And I know the White House has actually been working with members of Congress. Maybe now we can get it moving again so that we can upgrade it so that it does include all the tools and everything in our arsenal that we can use to try to work with our allies and our friends, come up with better intelligence.
You know, it is difficult finding intelligence that is actionable in a lot of these places. But we have to keep trying. And we have to do more to prevent the flood of foreign fighters who have gone to Syria, especially the ones with-- with western passports that come back. So there's a lot of work we need to do. And I wanna be sure that what's called the AUMF has the authority that is needed going forward.
I think that is the number one requirement. I also said that we should take-- increased numbers of refugees. The administration originally said ten. I said we should go to 65 but only if we have as carefully screening and vetting process as we can imagine whatever resources it takes.
Because I do not want us to-- in any way-- inadvertently allow people who wish us harm to come into our country. But I wanna say a quick word about what-- Senator Sanders and-- and then O-- and Governor O'Malley said. We do have to take a hard look at the defense budget. And we do have to figure out how we get ready to fight the adversaries of the future, not the past. But we have to also be very clear that we do have some continuing challenges. We got challenges in the South China Sea because of what China is doing in building up-- these-- military installations.
We have problems with Russia. Just the other day Russia allowed a-- television camera to see the plans for a drone submarine that could carry a tactical nuclear weapon. So we've gotta look at the full range and then come to some smart decisions about have-- having more streamlined and focused--
Well, first of all, it isn't the middle class. I have made very clear that-- hard-working, middle class families need a raise, not a tax increase. In fact-- wages adjusted for inflation haven't risen since-- the turn of the last century after my husband's administration. So we have a lot of work to do to get jobs going again, get incomes rising again.
And I have laid out specific plans. You can go to my website, HillaryClinton.com and read the details. And I will pay for it by, yes, taxing the wealthy more, closing corporate loopholes, deductions and other kinds of favorable treatment. And I can do it without raising the debt, without raising taxes on the middle class and making it reasonably-- manageable within our budget so that we can be fiscally responsible at the same time.
Well, we're gonna have to redo the way the prescription drug-- industry does business. For example, it is outrageous that we don't have an opportunity for Medicare to negotiate for lower prices. In fact, American-- consumers pay the highest prices in the world for drugs that we helped to be developed through the National Institutes of Health and that we then tested through the FDA. So there's more to my plan than just the cap. We have to go after price gouging and monopolistic practices and get Medicare the authority to negotiate.
Well, look, I believe that we've made great progress as a country with the Affordable Care Act. We've been struggling to get this done since Harry Truman. And it was not only a great accomplishment of the Democratic Party but of President Obama.
--be engaged in.
Well, first of all, I know that-- the president has appealed the-- decision-- to the Supreme Court. And my reading of the law and the Constitution-- convinces me that the president has the authority that he is attempting to exercise with respect to dreamers and their parents because I think all of us on this stage agree that-- we need comprehensive immigration reform with a path to citizenship.
Border security has always been a part of that debate. And it is a fact that the-- net immigration from-- Mexico and south has basically zeroed out. So what we wanna do is to say, "Look, we have 11 million people who have been here, many of them for decades." They have children who are doing so well. I've met and worked with dreamers. I think any parent would be so proud of them. So let's move toward what we should be doing as a nation and follow the values of our immigration history and begin to make it possible for them to come out of the shadows and to have (APPLAUSE) and a future for their kids--full path of citizenship.
But I do take what Alan Krueger said seriously. He is the foremost expert in our country on the minimum wage-- and what its effects-- are. And the overall message is that it doesn't result in job loss. However what Alan Krueger said in the piece you're referring to is that if we went to $15.00 there are no international comparisons. That is why I support a $12.00 national federal minimum wage. That is what the democrats in the senate have put forward as a proposal.
But I do believe that is a minimum. And places like Seattle, like Los Angeles, like New York City, they can go higher. It's what happened in-- Governor O'Malley's state. There was a minimum wage at the state level. And some places went higher. I think that is the smartest way to be able to move forward because if you go to $12.00 it would be the highest historical average we've ever had.
You would expect a median wage. Of course you would do the trial. And you would index it. But I-- I think--
He's not on Wall Street.
Well, I-- I think it's pretty clear that they know that I will. You've got two billionaire hedge fund managers who've started a super PAC. And they're advertising against me in Iowa as we speak. So they clearly think I'm going to do what I say I will do. And you can look at what I did in the senate. I did introduce legislation to reign in-- compensation. I looked at ways that the shareholders would have more control over what was going on in that arena and specifically said to Wall Street that-- what they were doing in the mortgage market was bringing our country down.
I've laid out a very aggressive-- plan to reign in Wall Street not just the big banks. That's a part of the problem. And I am going right at them. I've got a comprehensive, tough plan. But I went further than that. We have to go after what's called the shadow banking industry, those hedge funds. Look at what happened in '08, AIG a big insurance company, Lehman Brothers, an investment bank helped to bring our economy down. So I wanna look at the whole problem. And that's why my proposal is much more comprehensive than anything else that's been put forth.
Well, John, John, wait a minute, wait a minute.
--he has basically used his answer to impugn my integrity, let's be frank here.
Oh, wait a minute, senator. (LAUGH) You know, not only do I have hundreds of thousands of donors, most of them small, I am very proud that for the first time a majority of my donors are women, 60 percent. (APPLAUSE) So I-- I represented New York. And I represented New York on 9/11 when we were attacked.
Where were we attacked? We were attacked in downtown Manhattan where Wall Street is. I did spend a whole lot of time and effort helping them rebuild. That was good for New York. It was good for the economy. And it was a way to rebuke the terrorists who had attacked our country. (APPLAUSE)
So, you know, it's fine for you to say what you're gonna say. But I look very carefully at your proposal reinstating Glass Steagall is a part of what very well could help but it is nowhere near enough. My proposal is tougher, more effective and more comprehensive because I go after all of Wall Street not just the big banks. (APPLAUSE)
Well, you know, governor I know that when you had a chance to appoint a commissioner for financial regulation you chose an investment banker in 2010. So for me it is looking at what works and what we need to do to try to move past what happened in '08.
And I will go back and say again AIG was not a big bank. It had to be bailed out. And it nearly destroyed us. Lehman Brothers was not a big bank. It was an investment bank. And its bankruptcy and its failure nearly destroyed us. So I've said if the big banks don't play by the rules I will break them up.
And I will also go after executives who are responsible for the decisions that have such bad consequences for our country. (APPLAUSE)
Well, I think that there are different-- records. I-- you know, know that-- Senator Sanders-- had a different vote than I did-- when it came to giving immunity to gun makers and sellers. That was a terrible mistake. It basically gave the gun lobby even more power to intimidate-- legislators not just in Washington but across the country.
But just think about this, since we last debated in Las Vegas nearly 3,000 people have been killed by guns, 21 mass shootings including one last weekend in Des Moines where three were murdered, 200 children have been killed. This is an emergency. There are a lot of things we've gotta do in our country. Reigning in Wall Street is certainly one of them. I agree with that. That's why I've got such a good plan. But we have to also go after the gun lobby. And 92 percent of Americans agree we should have universal background checks, close the gun show loophole, close the out of (APPLAUSE) loophole and-- I wanna-- but I-- I will do everything I can as president to get that accomplished.
I-- I said I made a mistake on Iraq. And I would love to see Senator Sanders join with some of my colleagues-- in the senate that I-- see in the audience, let's reverse the immunity. Let's--
Let's go to the gun makers and tellers-- on notice that they're not gonna get away with it.
'Cause you think that that's a mistake.
There-- there is broad consensus. 92 percent in the most recent poll of Americans want gun safety measures.
And 85 percent of gun owners agree. We've got the consensus. What we're lacking is political leadership. And that's what you and others can start providing in the senate. (APPLAUSE)
Well, I'm sorry that whoever tweeted that-- had that impression because I worked closely with New Yorkers after 9/11 for my entire first term to rebuild. And so yes, I did know people. I had a lot of folks give me donations from all kinds of backgrounds, say, "I don't agree with you on everything. But I like what you do. I like how you stand up. I'm going to support you." (LAUGH) And I think that is absolutely perfect.
But--
Well, I'll tell you who's on my side, Paul Krugman, the Nobel prize winning economist who said my plan for what we should do to reign in Wall Street was more comprehensive and better. Paul Volcker, one of the leading lights of trying to reign in the excesses has also said he does not support reinstating Glass Steagall.
So I mean, this may seem like a bit of an arcane discussion. I have nothing against the passion that my two friends here have about reinstating Glass Steagall. I just don't think it would get the job done. I'm all about making sure (APPLAUSE) we actually get results for whatever reason.
I'm sorry, I couldn't hear you.
I agree completely. (LAUGHTER) (APPLAUSE) I couldn't have said it better myself. But-- but I-- I did wanna-- I-- I wanted to follow up. Look, we need more Americans to be involved in the political process. And I give Senator Sanders a lot of credit for really lighting a fire under many people, young, old, everybody who sees a chance to be involved and have their voice heard.
Look at what's happening with the Republicans. They're doing everything they can to prevent the voices of Americans to be heard. (APPLAUSE) They're trying to prevent people from registering to vote. So we do need to take on the Republicans-- very clearly and directly. But the other thing I just wanted quickly to say is I think President Obama deserves more credit than he gets for what he got done-- (APPLAUSE) in Washington despite the Republican oppression.
Well, I think after 11 hours that's pretty clear. Yeah. (LAUGHTER) (CHEERING) (APPLAUSE) You know, I-- I do think it's important to do exactly what Senator Sanders said. And that is to start talking about the issues that the American people really care about and that they talk to each of us about and to contrast.
--side. And if you listen to what they say, and I had a chance over those 11 hours to watch and listen as well as what I see in their debate, they are putting forth alarming plans. I mean, all of us support funding Planned Parenthood. All of us believe climate change is real. All of us want equal pay for equal work. They don't believe in any of that. So let's focus on what this election is really gonna be about. (APPLAUSE)
Well, John, I come from-- the '60s, a long time ago. There was a lot of activism on campus. Civil rights activism, anti-war activism, women's rights activism. And I do-- appreciate the way young people-- are standing up and speaking out. Obviously, I believe that on a college campus, there should be enough respect so people hear each other.
But what happened-- at the university there, what's happening at other universities, I think reflects the deep sense of, you know, concern, even despair that so many young people, particularly of color have. You know I recently met with a group of mothers who lost their children to-- either-- killings by police or random killings-- in their neighborhoods.
And hearing their stories was so incredibly, profoundly heartbreaking. Each one of them, you know, describe their child, had a picture. You know, the mother of the young man with his friends in the car who was playing loud music and, you know, some older white man pulled out a gun and shot him because they wouldn't turn the radio down.
Or a young woman who had been-- performing at President Obama's second inauguration, coming home-- absolutely stellar young woman, hanging out with her friends in a park, getting shot by a gang member. And of course, I-- I met the mothers of Eric Garner and Tamir Rice and Michael Brown and Trayvon Martin and so many of them who have lost their children.
So your original question is the right question, and it's not just a question for parents and grandparents to answer. It's really a question for all of us to answer. Every single one of our children deserves the chance to live up to his or her god-given potential. And that's what we need to be doing to the best of our ability in our country--
Governor, if I could just jump in. I-- I believe that we should make community college free. We should have debt-free college if you go to a public college or university. You should not have to borrow a dime to pay tuition. I wanna use Pell grants to help defray-- the living expenses that often-- make a difference whether a young person can stay in school or not.
Well, the revolution never came. (LAUGHTER) And I waited and I've got the scars to show for it. We now have this great accomplishment known as the Affordable Care Act. And-- I don't think we should have to be defending it amount Democrats. We ought to be working to improve it and prevent Republicans from both undermining it and even repealing it.
(THROAT CLEAR) Well, there are so many. I don't know where to start. (LAUGHTER) I guess the one I-- I would pick is-- the fact that I was part of a very small group that had to advise the president about whether or not to go after bin Laden. I spent a lot of time in the Situation Room-- as Secretary of State and there were many very difficult-- choices presented to us.
But probably that was the most-- challenging. Because there was no certainty attached to it. The intelligence was by no means absolute. We had all kinds of-- questions that we discussed. And, you know, at the end-- I recommended to the president that we take-- the chance-- to do what-- we could to find out whether that was bin Laden and to finally-- bring him to justice.
It was an excruciating experience. I couldn't talk to anybody about it. In fact, after it happened, the president called my husband, he called all the former presidents. And he said to Bill, "Well, I-- I assume Hillary's told you about this." And Bill said, "No, no, she hasn't." There was nobody to talk to and it-- it really did give me an insight into the very difficult problems presidents face--
Well, thank you very much to-- CBS and everyone here this evening, for giving us another chance-- to appear before you. I've heard a lot about me-- in this debate. And I'm gonna keep talking and thinking about all of you. Because ultimately, I think the president's job-- is to do everything possible, everything that she can do to lift up the people of this country.
Starting with (APPLAUSE) our children and moving forward. I've spent my entire life, since I started as a young lawyer for the Children's Defense Fund, trying to figure out how we can even the odds for so many people in America, this great country of ours, who are behind, who don't have a chance. And that's what I will do as your president. I will work my heart out. I need your help. All of you in Iowa, I need you to caucus for me. Please go to HillaryClinton.com and be part of making this country what we know it can and should be.

I am excited about really getting into the debate with Senator Sanders.
New Hampshire, the eyes of the world are going to be on you again.
Here's what I want you to know.
It is rare...
-- it is rare that we have the opportunity we do now...
-- to have a real contest of ideas.
To really think hard about what the Democratic Party stands for and what we want the future of our country to look like if we do our part to build it.
I am a progressive who gets things done for people.
Hello.
Please welcome former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton.
Thank you very much.
It feels great. I've had just an amazing time. We landed in the middle of the night from Iowa still pretty pumped up about winning there, and then got to work the next day.
And I'm seeing a lot of old friends, meeting a lot of new people. I have an uphill climb and I'm going to climb as high and hard as I can because I want to make my case for the people of New Hampshire.
You know, I don't know. I...
Well, the intensity of the experience and the importance of trying to convey what's at stake in this election, because to me obviously Tuesday is a really big deal with the primary.
But the goal has to be to prevent the Republicans from getting back into the White House and undoing all the progress that has been made under President Obama.
And so I -- I'm very proud of the campaign that Senator Sanders and I are running. I mean, we really have focused on issues. We share a lot of the same big progressive goals, but we have different ways of going about them. We bring different experiences.
But we are contrasting on issues, compared to the Republicans who, I think, are contrasting on insults. And I think it's a better contest where we can take our ideas to groups like this throughout New Hampshire, get questions, have people vet them, and then let the voters make up their minds.
Well, you know, you asked me this question in the first debate, right?
And I said that I'm a progressive who likes to get things done. And I was somewhat amused today that Senator Sanders has set himself up to be the gatekeeper on who is the progressive because under the definition that was flying around on Twitter and statements by the campaign, Barack Obama would not be a progressive, Joe Biden would not be a progressive, Jeanne Shaheen would not be a progressive, even the late, great Senator Paul Wellstone would not be a progressive.
You think so?
That's amazing. Yes. Look, you know, I was very fortunate to have a great team of young people, men and women, supporting me. But I accept the fact that I have work to do to convey what I stand for, what I've accomplished, what I want to do for young people in our country.
But I -- well, you know, I don't really know, Anderson. I think -- here's what I want young people to know. They don't have to be for me, I'm going to be for them. It doesn't really matter.
If they are not supporting me, I will be their president, I will do everything I can to give them the opportunities they deserve.
people across the country in Iowa, New Hampshire and elsewhere. I do sense this real feeling of being somehow disadvantaged, put on the wrong side of American opportunity. And I understand that.
I mean the student debt problems, the feeling that the jobs that are out there are not producing the kind of income or opportunity that young people believe they should be able to get. But at the same time I'm so impressed by the level, the intensity of commitment of this generation to you know really going after discrimination, going after racism and sexism and the kind of abuses that LGBT community members have, looking for ways to bring more justice in the economy and the environment, fighting climate change.
Well, that's for Sen. Sanders to explain because that certainly is the core of his message to young people. I have a different take on it. I think the progress that we have made, and particularly the Democratic Party has made, has been hard fought for, hard won and must be defended.
I fought really hard. The insurance companies and the drug companies spent millions against me. I know what it's like to go up against the status quo and special interests.
Sure.
Hi, David.
Right.
Well, I'll tell you what, Dave. I do have a litmus test. I have a bunch of litmus tests because I agree with you. The next president could get as many as three appointments. You know one of the many reasons why we can't turn the White House over to the Republicans again is because of the Supreme Court.
-- we've got to make sure to preserve "Roe v. Wade," not let it be nibbled away or repealed. We've got work to do and...
-- here's how I think about it, because when I was a senator, I had to vote on Supreme Court justices.
Thank you.
Well, first of all, thank you for being here.
Thank you so much for being part of this great New Hampshire primary process and thank you for support. And I really appreciate your asking the question. And I have to tell you, this is the first time I've been asked that question.
Yes. I -- I really -- I really...
And I thank you for it, because we need to have a conversation in our country.
There are states, as you know...
-- that are moving to open up the opportunity without criminal liability for people to make this decision, in consultation by their families, even, in some cases, with medical professionals. But the issue is whether the medical professionals want to be involved or just be counselors.
-- often. We are, on the good side, having many people live longer, but often, then, with very serious illnesses that they can be sustained on, but at some point, don't want to continue with the challenges that poses.
Hi, Michael.
No, I can't, Michael. I mean I -- I'd like to be able to say I could, but here's what I can say. I have learned and have been, you know, really in the crucible of making a lot of hard decisions over the last years.
And military force must always be a last resort not a first choice. That is one of the biggest differences between me and the Republicans.
I worked very hard as secretary of State HILLARY CLINTON: ...decisions over the last years. And military force must always be a last resort, not a first choice. That is one of the biggest differences between me and the Republicans. I worked very hard as Secretary of State to do what I could diplomatically to avoid conflict. That's why I worked to get the coalition together to impose sanctions in Iran, so that we could get them to the negotiating table, in order to test whether we could get an agreement to put a nuclear weapons agreement in place. I did that in large measure motivated by my deep concern that the absence of effective diplomacy might very well have sparked an arms race among some very unstable nations in the region, and maybe even led to conflict. I will do everything I possibly can to avoid sending American troops abroad, getting us involved in military conflicts. But I can't in good conscious stand here and tell you that there would never be any circumstances in the time that I served as President where it very well might be in America's best vital national security interest. So I want to be honest with you. I will do what I can, I will stand against adventurism, ill thought out missions. I will not send American combat troops to Iraq or Syria. That is off the table. That would be a terrible mistake. We will continue to use Special Forces, and we have to because of the kinds of threats we face. You know, the network of terrorist organizations -- not just ISIS, but others who are part of this unfortunate network that stretches from North Africa to South Asia -- pose serious threats to friends, allies, and partners, as well as to ourselves. And we've got to keep our country safe, and we have to work with the rest of the world to try to defeat ISIS, to end that terrorist threat. So I will be a very careful, deliberate decision maker when facing hard choices, because I know what's at stake. And I know you can understand why there can't be from me anyway a blanket statement. But I want to assure you I will be transparent, I will be open, and I will explain to the American people if any occasion arises where we do have to take military action to protect ourselves or our close friends and partners.
You know the first time I heard that yesterday and here's the reasoning, as best I, I understand from listening to the testimony excerpts. That, if we're going to open combat positions to qualified women so that they can compete to be Army Rangers, they can compete to be Navy Seals, they can compete to be Infantry Officers in the Marines, then we have expanded the definition of the all-volunteer military. I, I have to think about whether I think it's necessary to go as far as our military officers are recommending. You know, from my perspective, the all-volunteer military has worked, and we should not do anything that undermines it because it has provided a solid core of people who are willing to serve our country. The idea of having everybody register concerns me a little bit unless we have a better idea of where that's going to come out. Where I want people to register, I want every young person to register at the age of 18 to be able to vote automatically, and I think if -- if we had, you know, if we had a system like that I would, I would be very, very pleased about it. I have a hard time imagining the kind of national emergency that would require the use of the Selective Service system. So I just have to be better informed about why they're making this recommendation.
Hi, Rebecca.
Oh, I think that's a very fair question. You know, I did...QUESTION: was a mistake. What have you learned since that vote that could give me confidence that you wouldn't make a mistake of that magnitude again?
Oh, I think that's a very fair question.
You know I did make a mistake and I admitted that I made a mistake. And in large measure that mistake really arose from the Bush administration's approach to what they thought they could accomplish in Iraq.
The very explicit appeal that President Bush made before announcing the invasion that getting that vote would be a strong piece of leverage in order to finish the inspections. And he made that comment.
And the U.N. Inspector Hans Blix said, give us the time, we will find out. Give us the hammer over their head, namely the vote, and we will be able to find out what they still have in terms of WMD. And the Bush administration didn't give them the time. And that was a breach of faith, in my view.
But you know I gave them the vote, in large measure because I thought that would give us the time and we would find out, short of invasion. Turned out not to be. And I really regret that that's the way President Bush proceeded.
That would not be something you would have to worry about with me. If I tell you we're going to do diplomacy, we're going to hang tough, we're going to get answers, that's exactly what we will do.
Hi, Sean (ph).
Well, Sean (ph), I had a lot of practice.
Right.
Don't you?
Yes. It's gotten even better funded. You know they brought in some new multibillionaires to pump the money in.
And look, these guys play for keeps. They want to control our country.
Yes. It has gotten even better funded. You know, they brought in some new multi-billionaires to pump the money in.
And, look, these guys play for keeps. They want to control our country. Senator Sanders and I agree on that completely. They want to rig the economy so they continue to get richer and richer, they could care less about income inequality.
They salve their consciences by giving big money to philanthropy, and, you know, getting great pictures of them standing in front of whatever charity they donated to.
But make no mistake, they want to destroy unions. They want to go after any economic interests that they don't believe they can control. They want to destroy our balance of power. They want to go after our political system and fill it with people who will do their bidding.
I said today in Dover, you know, I don't think all of the Republican candidates are so ill-informed about climate change that they say they don't know because they're not scientists. They're just doing the bidding of the Koch brothers.
They're told don't you dare say climate change is real because we're in the fossil fuel business. So this is exactly what they are up to. And, yes...
... it is probably -- look, at this point it's probably not correct to say it's a conspiracy because it's out in the open. You know, there is no doubt about what they're doing and who the players are and what they're trying to achieve.
And they're shopping among the Republican candidates to figure out who among them will most likely do their bidding. So just know what we're up against because it's real and we're going to beat it.
But it's going to take everybody working together.
Hi, Alison.
Thank you.
Well, thank you for starting by saying it's related to what I just said. And I acknowledge this as personally painful as it is.
When you have been subjected to the level, the velocity of attacks that come every day, even if there is no factual basis to it, it's just normal for people to say, gosh, there has got to be something, why do they keep saying this and then we do that.
And, you know, I testify for 11 hours, there's nothing to Benghazi, they don't give it up, they keep coming after it.
Hello, Rabbi.
Another absolutely wonderful question.
Thank you, Rabbi.
I think about this a lot. Um, I feel very fortunate that I am a person of faith, that I was raised in my church and that I have had to deal and struggle with a lot of these issues about ambition and humility, about service and self-gratification, all of the human questions that all of us deal with, but when you put yourself out into the public arena, I think it's incumbent upon you to be as self-conscious as possible.
This is hard for me. You know, I never thought I'd be standing on a stage here asking people to vote for me for president. I always wanted to be of service. I met my husband, who was such a natural, knew exactly what he wanted to do. I was happy to support him while I worked in the Children's Defense Fund and legal services and taught law, and, you know, had our daughter.
I never thought I would do this. And so I have had to come to grips with how much more difficult it often is for me to talk about myself than to talk about what I want to do for other people, or to tell stories about, you know, the man I met in Rochester who -- whose AIDS medicine is no longer affordable. And that -- that can grip me and make me feel like there's something I can do about that.
OK.
OK.
Well, look, that's just not the case. And I did represent New York, obviously. There was no doubt that I took on a lot of what was going down on Wall Street, including calling them out on the mortgage issue...
And I did represent New York, obviously. There was no doubt that I took on a lot of what was going down on Wall Street, including calling them out on the mortgage issues, calling for a Consumer Financial Protection Bureau even before we got one created, calling for changes in CEO pay.
But I honestly think that the best answer to this is the fact that everybody that I know who looks at what's happening in this campaign sees the same thing. The Wall Street interests, the money interests, the Republican political interests are spending a lot of money to try to defeat me. So I just find it kind of a strange argument.
I happen to agree with Sen. Sanders. I'm not just going after Wall Street though. I think that's too narrow a target.
I think we need to go after a company like Johnson Controls that is trying to avoid paying taxes after all of us bailed it out by pretending to sell itself in a so-called inversion in Europe. It's a perversion. It should be stopped.
I want to go after the hedge funds that have bought up drug companies, you know Valeant Pharmaceuticals, Turing Pharmaceuticals, taking drugs that have been around a long time and upping the price.
Look. I made speeches to lots of groups. I told them what I thought. I answered questions.
Well, I don't know. That's what they offered, so...
Well, I didn't know...
To be honest I wasn't -- I wasn't committed to running. I didn't know whether I would or not.
I didn't. You know when I was secretary of State several times I said you know I think I'm done. And you know, so many people came to me, started talking to me.
The circumstances, the concerns I had about the Republicans taking back the White House, because I think they wrecked what we achieved in the 1990s with 23 million new jobs and incomes going up for everybody. I did not want to see that happen again. I want to defend President Obama's accomplishments and the progress we've made. I want to go further.
Fine with me. I'm proud to have 90 percent of my donations from small donors and 60 percent, the highest ever, from women, which I'm really, really glad about.
No, I don't, because, you know, I don't feel that I paid any price for it and I am very clear about what I will do and they're on notice.
Hi, Chris.
I will do a lot, Chris, because we have an opportunity to do much more with respect to research into marijuana, what it can do to help people with the kinds of conditions you've just briefly described.
I want to move it from a Schedule I drug to a Schedule II so that we can begin to do more research. The NIH and a lot of universities can begin to try to find out. Because I want you to know what we know from science.
But I also want you to be able to use it while we're doing the research. And so many states, as you know, have moved to provide legal protection for the use of medical marijuana.
I support that. I think that the states are the laboratories of our democracy. We should be learning about what works, what doesn't work. Different states have actually listed the kind of illnesses and conditions that it can be used for. Are they right? We don't know. That's why we have got to do the research.
I also want you to know what dosage is right, what interacts with the other medication you're taking. I want to accelerate this because I have no doubt that there are very real benefits for people.
Hi.
How old are they?
Well, first of all, tell them I'm glad they're interested in politics, and I really mean that. I want them to be involved. I want them to feel like I felt when I was that age, some years ago, and getting excited and interested in politics for the first time.
I also want them to take a look at my record, what I have done my entire life, starting as a young lawyer working for the Children's Defense Fund, taking on the problem of juveniles incarcerated with adults in South Carolina, trying to gather information to end segregated academies...
I want them to take a look at my record, what I have done my entire life, starting as a young lawyer working for the Children's Defense Fund, taking on the problem of juveniles incarcerated with adults in South Carolina, trying to gather information to end segregated academies in the South. I want them to know that I was a legal services lawyers, standing up for equality under the law, defending people's rights because I believe passionately that those of us who have the opportunity to serve should serve.
And then I hope they will look at what I have accomplished from, you know, starting the Children's Health Insurance Program that insures eight million kids, looking at ways to try to be smart in reforming our adoption and foster care system, with very partisan Republicans when I was First Lady. Getting healthcare for our National Guard. Helping to negotiate and implement a treaty to reduce nuclear weapons. A long list. And the reason I say that is I think it's very important that, as people move toward the primary on Tuesday, whatever your age, you really think about what someone is proposing and what their record is about getting it done. And as I've said and I mean it absolutely, I have the highest respect for Senator Sanders.
But as the "Concord Monitor" said today in its writing about this, you know, it's, it's very hard to see how any of his proposals could ever be achievable. So I don't want to over promise. We've got too much of that. I want to tell people what I will do. I want to be specific because I do want to -- to go back to the question I was asked earlier -- recreate the trust that seems to have been splintered in America. We need to set big goals again. I am all for that. I have big, ambitious goals. Affordable college, early childhood education, making sure that we are on the path to paid family leave, all of which will help your daughters.
But I also want them to hold me accountable. I want them to say, OK, how's that actually going to happen? What do we have to do to make it? We've got to get 60 votes to break a filibuster in the Senate. Nancy Pelosi has said, we're not going to revisit healthcare. We're going to stick with the Affordable Care Act. That's exactly where I am. We're going to improve it. Because I am somebody who wants to actually produce a real difference in people's lives. I am a progressive who gets results. And I will be a progressive President who gets results. And the final thing I would say is, it is still the case that there are challenges and obstacles to young women's ambitions.
And I'm going to try to break the highest and hardest glass ceiling. I hope it splinters completely and, and I hope for your daughters it opens doors that might not be open right now, regardless of whether any of them ever do any politically. But in their lives, their profession, how they're treated. I hope it does give them more of a sense of empowerment. That's what I want for my daughter and my amazing granddaughter, and that's what I want for your daughters.
You don't think they know everything?
I used to do this in the White House and, you know, I would, I would put on a baseball cap and sunglasses and, you know, sweat pants and a sweat shirt, and put my hair back, and I would go walk. And I would tell the Secret Service they had to wear casual clothes, they had to take the things out of their ears, they had to look like they were just tourists. I had the best time, you know. I would, I would end up over on the Mall sometimes, walking around. And a family would come up and say, would you mind taking our picture in front of the White House. I'd be happy to. Here, why don't you...
So, you know, there's nothing I like better than to be anonymous, as hard as that is to achieve. So I would spend the day, you know, out in nature, talking a long walk, walking through one of the beautiful towns here in New Hampshire, stopping in a cafe, stopping in a bookstore. You know, maybe calling some of my friends, some of whom are here tonight, and say, don't tell anybody but meet me, you know, there. That's what I, that's what I want to do, and it's what I get the great joy out of. I am so fortunate that I still have my friends from grade school and every other phase of my life. And they keep me grounded, they keep me honest, they deflate my head, they deal with the universe in one pocket and the dust and ashes in the other. So anytime....
that I still have my friends from grade school and every other phase of my life. And they keep me grounded. They keep me honest. They deflate my head. They deal with the universe in one pocket and the dust and ashes in the other.
She calls me grandma. Grandma. Yes.
She's working really hard on words. And it was so thrilling. They came to Iowa that last weekend because we obviously weren't going to leave.
And so they got in late the night, Saturday night. And Sunday morning I'm getting ready. And you know Bill and I are you know having coffee and everything.
Right.
She was.
Right.
You know, my mother truly is my inspiration because she had such a terrible, miserable life and was abandoned and rejected by her own family, and was out at the age of 14 working as a housemaid. And her resilience, her love, her ability to have her own family to take such good care of us was just, you know to me the ultimate accomplishment in any life.
And she would always give me the advice she gave me as a little girl. You know you get knocked down. Everybody gets knocked down. What matters is whether you get up.
And when you get up, what do you do? How do you behave? Are you going to be bitter? Angry? Upset? Are you going to try to be positive, get something done, help somebody else? And I'm sure that's exactly what she'd be saying now.
She'd be encouraging me. She'd be very proud, a little apprehensive because you know it's a brutal business being in politics.
And people say things about those you love, whether it's your daughter or someone else. So she was very supportive. But you could tell you know how much pain she kind of absorbed from time to time.
And so I would sit with her and I would say don't listen to that stuff, mom. And she'd say, well I have to know what they're saying about you. And I'd say you know don't put yourself through that. And so that would be what she'd be doing now I think too. Yes.
Oh.
Well, thank you.
Well, first of all, thanks again for being part of this process, this first in the nation primary. You know I said earlier today some people said well you know Sen. Sanders is ahead. And I respect that. And so maybe you know I should go onto the next state. And I said absolutely not.
New Hampshire has been so good to me and my family. And I love campaigning in New Hampshire. I love this process.
So, you're going to have to put up with me. I'm going to be going around the state, going to as many events as I can, answering as many questions, trying to talk about what I am offering. I really believe that we have a chance to build on the progress we've made and to get results for people.

Look, I'm deeply concerned about what is happening in every community in America. And that includes white communities where we are seeing an increase in alcoholism, addiction, earlier deaths, people with a high school education or less are not even living as long as their parents lived. This is a remarkable and horrifying fact.
And that's why I have come forward with, for example, a plan to revitalize coal country. The coal field communities that have been so hard hit by the changing economy, by the reduction in the use of coal. You know coal miners and their families who help turn on the lights and power our factories for generations are now wondering, has our country forgotten us? Do people not care about all of our sacrifice?
And I'm going to do everything I can to address distressed communities. Whether they are communities of color, whether they are white communities, whether they are in any part of our country. I particularly appreciate the proposal that Congressman Jim Clyburn has, the 10-20-30 proposal to try to spend more federal dollars in communities with persistent generational poverty.
And you know what, if you look at the numbers, there are actually as many, if not more, white communities that are truly being left behind and left out. So yes, I do think if would be a terrible oversight not to address the very real problems that white Americans, particularly those without a lot of education, whose jobs have no longer provided them or even no longer present in their communities. Because we have to focus where the real hurt is. And that's why as president, I will look at communities that need special help and try to deliver that.
I can't speak for the Koch brothers.
Are you referring to a Super PAC that we don't coordinate with, that was set up to support President Obama that has now decided they want to support me? They are the ones who should respond to any questions.
Let's talk about our campaigns. I'm very proud of the fact that we have more than 750,000 donors. And the vast majority of them are giving small contributions. So I am proud of Sen. Sanders, and his supporters. I think it's great that, you know, Sen. Sanders, President Obama, and I have more donors than any three people who have ever run and certainly on the Democratic side.
That's the way it should be. And I am going to continue to reach out, to thank all my online contributors for everything they are doing for me. To encourage them to help me and do more. Just as Sen. Sanders is. And I think that is the real key here. We both have a lot of small donors. I think that sets us apart from a lot of what is happening on the Republican side.
The Koch brothers have a very clear political agenda. It is an agenda in my view that would do great harm to our country. We're going to fight it as hard as we can. And we're going to fight whoever the Republicans nominate who will be very dependent upon the Koch brothers and others.
That's fine. I listen to a wide variety of voices. That have expertise in various areas. I think it is fair to say whatever the complaints that you want to make about him are, that with respect to China, one of the most challenging relationships we have, his opening up China and his ongoing relationship with the leaders of China is an incredibly useful relationship for the United States of America. So if we want to pick and choose — and I certainly do — people I listen to, people I don't listen to, people I listen to for certain areas, then I think we have to be fair and look at the entire world because it is a big, complicated world out there.
Today Sen. Sanders said that President Obama failed the presidential leadership test. And this is not the first time that he has criticized President Obama. In the past he's called him weak. He has called him a disappointment. He wrote a forward for a book that basically argued voters should have buyer's remorse when it comes to President Obama's leadership and legacy.
And I just couldn't agree, disagree more with those kinds of comments. You know, from my perspective maybe because I understand what President Obama inherited – not only the worst financial crisis but the antipathy of the Republicans in Congress. I don't think he gets the credit he deserves for being a president and sending us into the future.
And it is the kind of criticism that we've heard from Sen. Sanders about our president I expect from Republicans. I do not expect from someone running for the Democratic nomination to succeed President Obama.
Senator, what I am concerned about, is not disagreement on issues saying that this is what I would rather do, I don't agree with the president on that. Calling the president weak, calling him a disappointment, calling several times that he should have a primary opponent when he ran for reelection in 2012, you know, I think that goes further than saying we have our disagreements.
As a senator, yes, I was a senator. I understand we can disagree on the path forward. But those kinds of personal assessments and charges are ones that I find troubling.
You know, I completely agree with Sen. Sanders. The first speech I gave in this campaign back in April was about criminal justice reform and ending the era of mass incarceration. The statistics from Wisconsin are particularly troubling. Because it is the highest rate of incarceration for African Americans in our nation, twice the national average.
And we know of the tragic, terrible event that lead to the death of Dontre Hamilton right here in Milwaukee — a young man, unarmed, who should still be with us. His family certainly believes that. And so do I. So we have work to do. There have been some good recommendations about what needs to happen.
President Obama's policing commission came out with some. I have fully endorsed those. But we have to restore policing that will actually protect the communities that police officers are sworn to protect.
And then we have to go after sentencing, and that's one of the problems here in Wisconsin because so much of what happens in the criminal justice system doesn't happen at the federal level, it happens at the state and local level.
But I would also add this. There are other racial disparities, really systemic racism in this state and in others in education, in employment, in the kinds of factors that too often lead from a position where young people, particularly young men, are pushed out of school early, are denied employment opportunities. So when we talk about criminal justice reform and ending the era of mass incarceration, we also have to talk about jobs, education, housing, and other ways of helping communities do better.

Well, I have the greatest respect for Mike Bloomberg we worked together during the eight years I was in the Senate.  He has elected, as you know, shortly after I joined, and he has to make his own decisions.  But I look forward to continuing to work with him, and finding ways that he can show leadership, which he has done so well over the years. 
 Right, right. 
 Well, Bret, let's talk about it in context, and let's remember what was going on at the time.  It was during the so-called Arab Spring.  People in Libya who had been living under the dictatorship of Gadhafi for 42 years were rising up. And he, as we all can remember, was a ruthless dictator with American blood on his hands. 
Ronald Reagan, as you recall, tried to take him out because of the danger he posed.  And once it became clear to him that the people of Libya were trying to get more freedom and hopefully a better future, he basically said he was going to hunt them down like cockroaches. 
The Europeans who had a lot more of a connection with Libya, going back many decades, were absolutely intent upon working with us with NATO.  For the first time, Arab countries stepped up and said, we will work with NATO, because this man has paid for efforts to undermine us, assassinate our leaders, all around bad character. 
 No. no. 
 Not U.S. combat troops.  We already are,  as you know, from the headlines and the stories, using special forces, using air strikes to go after ISIS leaders. 
But I want to just stress the point I was making -- leaving a dictator in place, like the Iranians and Russians have done with Assad, where we have at least 250,000 people killed, Libya, the numbers are minuscule in comparison, about 1,500 last year. There is a concerted effort.  The U.N.  and others are really working hard to try to unify the different elements within the country. 
 Well, again, let me put this in context, because it's an important question.  Right now the Supreme Court is considering a decision that would shut down a lot of the options for women in Texas, and there have been other legislatures that have taken similar steps to try to restrict a woman's right to obtain an abortion. 
Under Roe v. Wade, which is rooted in the Constitution, women have this right to make this highly personal decision with their family in accordance with their faith, with their doctor. 
It's not much of a right if it is totally limited and constrained. 
 No -- I have been on record in favor of a late pregnancy regulation that would have exceptions for the life and health of the mother. 
I object to the recent effort in Congress to pass a law saying after 20 weeks, you know, no such exceptions, because although these are rare, Bret, they sometimes arise in the most complex, difficult medical situation. 
 And threats to the woman's health. 
 And so I think it is -- under Roe v. Wade, it is appropriate to say, in these circumstances, so long as there's an exception for the life and health of the mother. 
 Absolutely true. 
 Absolutely not. 
 No, but let me clarify this, because, you know, there's much misinformation going on around here.  And let me just start with the basic facts.  I have said it wasn't the best choice to use a personal email.  It was a mistake.  However, I am not alone in that. Many people in the government, past and current, have on occasion or as a practice done the same. 
Nothing I sent was marked classified or that I received was marked classified.  And specifically, with respect to your question, every government official, and this is a legal theory -- not just a theory, it's a legal rule, gets to choose what is personal and what is it official.  What we turned over were more than 30,000 emails that I assumed were already in the government system, Bret, because they were sent to  state.gov addresses.  
 No, that was in the State Department, not in me. I've turned over everything. 
 No, you can't.  Here's what happened, the State Department has a process for determining what is or isn't classified. If they determine it is, they mark it as classified. 
 The State Department decides. 
 No, the State Department decides what is -- and let me go a step further here, I will reiterate, because it's a fact, nothing I sent or received was marked classified.  Now, what happens when you ask or when you are asked to make information public is that it's reviewed and different agencies come in with their opinions. 
 Well, what I'm saying is, it wasn't at the time. Now if you -- let's take Mary Smith who has some information in the government.  And she is FOIAed, Freedom of Information Act, give us your information, your memos, your emails, whatever it might have been.  That then goes through a process.  So even though the agency she works in has none of this is classified, others start to have a chance to weigh-in. 
 Oh, I love the United Way.  Hi. 
 Thank you. 
 You know, this is one of the most important questions for everybody in Washington, not just the next president.  I will tell you what I have done and what I intend to do. 
When I was first lady, senator, secretary of state, I worked closely with Republicans, some of the most partisan Republicans.  You know, after we failed to get health care done back in '93-'94, I turned around and started working with Democrats and Republicans to pass the Children's Health Insurance Plan, which has 8 million kids insured.  I also worked, because I care deeply about foster care and adoption, with one of the most partisan Republicans then in the Congress, Tom DeLay. 
But he cared about foster kids, I knew that.  I called him up.  I said, Congressman, would you work with me to reform the adoption and foster care system?  He said, what do you want to do?  I said, come to the White House, let's have a meeting.  We were able to find common ground on that issue. 
When I got to the Senate, I started working with people who had been some of the biggest critics and opponents of my husband's presidency.  And we found common ground.  I worked with, I think, nearly all, if not all, of the Republicans that I served with.  And when I became secretary of state, I did the same. 
Now, I'm not saying this is easy, but as my good friend Debbie Dingell knows, you have to work at it every single day. You have to get up.  You have to try to find the relationships. You have to build on it.  You have to find common ground.  And that is what I will do. 
Now, the other thing I will say, which is a little bit kind of funny, is when I'm not running for something, the Republicans say really nice things about me. 
 And I have like a whole archive of those comments because I did work with them, and I will work with them.  I'll go anywhere to meet with anyone, any time, to find common ground.  I will also stand my ground, because I will disagree with some of the things that they want to do. 
But I think your point is so important.  Our founders created a where they made clear no human being has all the answers.  You have to work together.  They had some really intense disagreements, but they kept working until they could come to some compromise.  Compromise is not a dirty word.  It is the way democracy has to work.  And that's what I will do. 
 You know, I've worked with so many of them.  And the women in the Senate became good friends, both Democrats and Republicans.  And we worked a lot of issues, Susan Collins from Maine, for example.  But I also worked with John McCain.  He and I joined together to raise money for the rehabilitation hospital in San Antonio, for returning veterans. 
And we also joined with others to work on some important issues. So I have good relations with a lot of Republicans.  I hesitate to mention any more names, it will probably hurt them and I do want to work with them. 
 Yes, that's true, though. 
 Hi, how are you, Mr. James? 
 Well, I think that, you know, as we said last night, both Senator Sanders and I supported it.  I didn't have a vote, but I did support it.  He voted for it.  Why did we do that?  Because there was a very serious crime challenge, even an epidemic in a lot of communities in our country at that time. 
 We need a comprehensive approach.  So, yes, we have to improve the criminal justice system, we have to divert people from jail and prison.  But we also have to provide educational opportunities, particularly for disadvantaged kids from the earliest ages, which is why I support quality early childhood education, universal pre-kindergarten education. 
 So I want to finish with just one additional comment, because you alluded to it. 
OK. I'd be glad to tell you, absolutely, because it's different Senator Sanders. So let me give you -- if I've got time. Do I have time? Brett? OK. This is exciting, good. Alright, here's what it is. 
I call it the New College Compact because everybody is going to have to do their part. I want debt-free tuition. You will never have to borrow money to attend a public college or university. The money that you will need will be provided if you cannot afford to go to college. And, right now, given the costs, that covers most people except wealthy people. 
What I am saying is that we will fund debt-free tuition. You won't have to borrow money. It's different from Senator Sanders in this regard, I think the costs are too high in college and university. 
Tuition has gone up 42 percent over the last 10 years. I don't understand how that can be justified. So, when Senator Sanders says ``free college'' with no pressure on the universities and college and the universities to lower their costs, I think that will only make it more expensive. So, I'm requiring that colleges and universities take a hard look at what they're charging, and if it's not related to a young person getting a degree that will lead to a job, don't charge the student. You will not be able to do that. 
Secondly, I expect states to start reinvesting in higher education. We have enough prisons, they don't need to be building more prisons, they need to be investing in colleges and universities. So, they will do their part. 
And, I have the funding worked out so that we're able to do this. Senator Sander relies, in order to get what he called free education, on Republican as well as Democratic governors putting in $23 billion dollars a year. Frankly I'm skeptical of that. 
So, I think we can get to where we need to get to, plus, reduce student debt. 
Not only have you refinance your student debt, but also make it possible for you to pay it back as a percentage of your income, which is what I got to do because I borrowed money to go to law school. 
And, I wasn't stuck with the high interest rates that too many people have today. 
Yes, well my numbers add up, and my numbers are connected to sources of funding that we can count on, and people have looked at my plans and Senator Sanders'. Mine costs about $100 billion dollars a year, and that is all paid for because I think it would be a mistake to run up the national debt, to run up the size government by 30 percent, 40 percent, 50 percent without knowing how we are going to pay for it. 
Well, first of all, we have to go at the mistakes that you just referenced that your son has experienced. I've heard about those. I'm a big supporter and defender of the Affordable Care Act because I think it has given us the chance to do what I have worked for, what Senator Sanders believes in, to get to universal coverage. We're at 90 percent coverage, we have 10 percent to go. 
So, I'm going to get the costs down. We are going to get out of pocket costs down, we're going to get deductibles down. We are going to require more free services within the benefit package, and we are going to right after prescription drug costs. 
So, all of that should help your son and everybody else. 
Here's something else I want to do. We need more competition in the healthcare marketplace. One of the ideas under the Affordable Care Act was to encourage nonprofits to get into providing health insurance. You know, Blue Shield, Blue Cross, used to be nonprofits. And, they made a perfectly good -- don't call it a profit because they were a nonprofit, but they made enough money to keep going, and to pay their executives and everybody else who worked there. 
Then, they all became for-profit. We need to get more companies, more nonprofits, to fill this space. The ones that knew what they were doing have provided good services, but a lot of them have failed because they didn't have the right support. So, I want more competition and I want competition from nonprofits so that we can really give the insurance companies a lot of pressure to get the costs down. 
Well, look, I think it's great that both of us are bringing a lot of people into the process. And, I applaud Senator Sanders for really getting a very big turnout among young people. 
 I love to see that, and I'm going to continue to attract young people. I'm proud of those who are supporting me. And, I tell young people all the time, you may not be for me now, but I'm for you regardless, and I'm going to keep working to try to help young people because, after all, this election is about their future. 
Final thing I would say about this is I think a lot of young people -- we heard an allusion, the father talking about his son, you know, a lot of young people are saying that is going, you know? 
They get out of the Great Recession and into the job market and there are no jobs. They are burdened with student debt, the ones that got student debt. They're feeling the economy doesn't work for them, the government doesn't work for them. I don't blame them for being really disturbed by what's going on in our country. That's why I'm not overpromising. 
Samuel? 
Thank you. 
Hi, Samuel. 
Oh, an ally for sure. And here's how I think about it, Samuel. We have differences, and we are passionate about our positions, and our differences. 
And, you know, like we saw in the debate last night, we air those differences about issues. Compare that to the Republicans and how they behave. 
You know, I am very proud of the campaign that Senator Sanders and I are running. And, I have said publicly, I will repeat that tonight. I hope to win the nomination. If I am so fortunate, I hope to work with him, the issues he has raised, the passion he has demonstrated, the people he has attracted, are going to be very important in the general election, but equally following the election to try to get things done. 
So, I certainly consider him an ally. 
Oh, let's not get ahead of ourselves, you know? 
My gosh, you know? I don't want to think any further ahead than tomorrow, and the Michigan primary. I can't do that. 
But, I do want to tell Samuel an experience that kind of illustrates what I'm talking about. 
You know, then Senator Obama and I ran a really tough campaign against each other to the very end. He won, I lost. So, when I dropped out, I said I would support him, and I began to do that. I nominated him at the convention in Denver. I worked really hard to get him elected. And, it wasn't easy to convince a lot of my supporters to immediately move to supporting the Senator Obama, but I made the case. I made the case in public, I made the case in private, and the vast majority did what I thought was the right thing, to support him to be president. 
So, when you get through a primary, despite the emotions that are engineered in your supporters, you have to take stock of where you are and who is running on the other side. 
And, what that person represents, and I think if any of the remaining candidates on the Republican side is nominated, then I think my supporters, Senator Sanders' supporters, we are going to find a lot of common cause to prevent that person from ever being president of the United States. 
Oh my gosh, it went by so fast, Bret. 

Well, we meet tonight here in Philadelphia, where our founders determined that the promise of America would be available for future generations, if we were willing and able to make it happen.
You know, I am here, as is Senator Obama. Neither of us were included in those original documents. But in a very real sense, we demonstrate that that promise of America is alive and well.
But it is at risk. There is a lot of concern across Pennsylvania and America. People do feel as though their government is not solving problems, that it is not standing up for them, that we've got to do more to actually provide the good jobs that will support families; deal once and for all with health care for every American; make our education system the true passport to opportunity; restore our standing in the world.
I am running for president because I know we can meet the challenges of today, that we can continue to fulfill that promise that was offered to successive generations of Americans, starting here, so long ago.
And I hope that, this evening, voters in Pennsylvania and others across the country will listen carefully to what we have to say, will look at our records, will look at the plans we have. And I offer those on my Web site, hillaryclinton.com, for more detail.
Because I believe with all my heart that we, the people, can have the kind of future that our children and grandchildren so richly deserve.
Well, Charlie, I'm going to do everything I possibly can to make sure that one of us takes the oath of office next January. I think that has to be the overriding goal, whatever we have to do.
Obviously, we are still contesting to determine who will be the nominee. But once that is resolved, I think it is absolutely imperative that our entire party close ranks. That we become unified. I will do everything to make sure that the people who supported me support our nominee. I will go anywhere in the country to make the case.
And I know that Barack feels the same way because both of us have spent 15 months traveling our country. I have seen the damage of the Bush years. I've seen the extraordinary pain that people have suffered from because of the failed policies. You know, those who have held my hands who've lost sons or daughters in Iraq. And those who have lost sons or daughters because they didn't have health insurance.
And so, regardless of the differences there may be between us, and there are differences, they pale in comparison to the differences between us and Senator McCain. So, we will certainly do whatever is necessary to make sure that a Democrat is in the White House next January.
Well, I am the granddaughter of a factory worker from Scranton who went to work in the Scranton lace mills when he was 11- years-old. Worked his entire life there, mostly six to eight weeks. He was also very active in the Court Street Methodist Church. And he raised three sons and was very proud that he sent all of them to college.
I don't believe that my grandfather or my father or the many people whom I have had the privilege of knowing and meeting across Pennsylvania over many years cling to religion when Washington is not listening to them.
I think that is a fundamental sort of misunderstanding of the role of religion and faith in times that are good and times that are bad.
And I similarly don't think that people cling to their traditions, like hunting and guns, either, when they are frustrated with the government. I just don't believe that's how people live their lives.
Now, that doesn't mean that people are not frustrated with the government. We have every reason to be frustrated, particularly with this administration.
But I can see why people would be taken aback and offended by the remarks. And I think what's important is that we all listen to one another, and we respect one another, and we understand the different decisions that people make in life, because we're a stronger country because of that.
And, certainly, the weeks that I have spent crisscrossing Pennsylvania, from Erie to Lancaster County, and meeting a lot of wonderful people, says to me that, despite whatever frustration anyone has with our government, people are resilient, they are positive, and they're ready for leadership again that will summon them to something greater than themselves and that we will deliver on that, if given a chance.
Well, I think we have to beat John McCain, and I have every reason to believe we're going to have a Democratic president and it's going to be either Barack or me. And we're going to make that happen.
And what is important is that we understand exactly the challenges facing us in order to defeat Senator McCain.
Yes, yes, yes. Now, I think that I can do a better job.
And I remember watching that on TV and saying, well, that's not who she is. That's not what she believes. That's not what she meant.
And I'm sure that that's how she felt, as well. But the problem is that that's the kind of politics that we've been accustomed to. And I think Senator Clinton learned the wrong lesson from it because she's adopting the same tactics.
What the American people want are not distractions. They want to figure out, how are we going to actually deliver on health care? How are we going to deliver better jobs for people? How are we going to improve their incomes? How are we going to send them to college? That's what we have to focus on. And, yes, they are, in part, frustrated and angry, because this is what passes for our politics instead of figuring out how do we build coalitions to actually move things forward.
Well, could I...
I do. First of all, I want to be very clear. My comments were about your remarks. And I think that's important because it wasn't just me responding to them, it was people who heard them, people who felt as though they were aimed at their values, their quality of life, the decisions that they have made.
Now, obviously, what we have to do as Democrats, is make sure we get enough votes to win in November. And as George just said, the Republicans, who are pretty shrewd about what it takes to win, certainly did jump on the comments.
But what's important here is what we each stand for and what our records are, and what we have done over the course of our lives, to try to improve the circumstances of those who deserve to live up to their own potential, to make the decisions that are right for them and their families.
And I think year after year, for, now, 35 years, I have a proven record of results. And what I'm taking into this campaign is my passion for empowering people, for giving people the feeling that they can make a better future for themselves.
And I think it's important that that starts from a base of respect and connection in order to be able to get people to follow you and believe that you will lead them in the better direction.
I was asked a personal question, Charlie, and I gave a personal answer. Obviously, one's choice of church and pastor is rooted in what one believes is what you're seeking in church and what kind of, you know, fellowship you find in church.
But I have to say that, you know, for Pastor Wright to have given his first sermon after 9/11 and to have blamed the United States for the attack, which happened in my city of New York, would have been just intolerable for me. And, therefore, I would have not been able to stay in the church.
And maybe it's, you know, just, again, a personal reflection that, regardless of whatever good is going on, and I have no reason to doubt that a lot of good things were happening in that church.
You get to choose your pastor. You don't choose your family, but you get to choose your pastor. And when asked a direct question, I said I would not have stayed in the church.
I think in addition to the questions about Reverend Wright and what he said and when he said it, and for whatever reason he might have said these things, there were so many different variations on the explanations that we heard.
And it is something that I think deserves further exploration because clearly, what we've got to figure out is how we're going to bring people together in a way that overcomes the anger, overcomes the divisiveness and whatever bitterness there may be out there. You know?
Well, Tom, I can tell you that I may be a lot of things. But I'm not dumb. And I wrote about going to Bosnia in my book in 2004. I laid it all out there. And you're right. On a couple of occasions in the last weeks, I just said some things that weren't in keeping with what I knew to be the case and what I had written about in my book.
And, you know, I'm embarrassed by it. I have apologized for it. I've said it was a mistake. And it is, I hope, something that you can look over because, clearly, I am proud that I went to Bosnia. It was a war zone. General Wesley Clark is here in the audience with me, as one of my major supporters. He and I were talking about it before I came out.
You know, our soldiers were there to try to police and keep the peace in a very dangerous area. They were totally in battle gear. There were concerns about potential dangers. The former president of Bosnia has said he was worried about the safety of the situation.
So, I know that it is something that some people have said wait a minute. What happened here? But I have talked about this and written about it. And then, unfortunately, in a few occasions, I was not as accurate as I have been in the past.
But I know, too, that being able to rely on my experience of having gone to Bosnia, gone to more than 80 countries, having represented the United States in so many different settings, gives me a tremendous advantage going into this campaign, particularly against Senator McCain.
So, I will either try to get more sleep, Tom or, you know, have somebody that, you know, is there, as a reminder to me. You know, you can go back for the past 15 months. We both have said things that, you know, turned out not to be accurate. You know, that happens when you're talking as much as we have talked. But, you know, I'm very sorry that I said it. And I have said that, you know, it just didn't jive with what I had written about and knew to be the truth.
Well, I think that is a fair general statement, but I also believe that Senator Obama served on a board with Mr. Ayers for a period of time, the Woods Foundation, which was a paid directorship position.
And, if I'm not mistaken, that relationship with Mr. Ayers on this board continued after 9/11 and after his reported comments, which were deeply hurtful to people in New York and, I would hope, to every American, because they were published on 9/11, and he said that he was just sorry they hadn't done more.
And what they did was set bombs. And in some instances, people died. So it is -- I think it is, again, an issue that people will be asking about.
And I have no doubt -- I know Senator Obama's a good man and I respect him greatly, but I think that this is an issue that certainly the Republicans will be raising.
And it goes to this larger set of concerns about how we are going to run against John McCain. You know, I wish the Republicans would apologize for the disaster of the Bush-Cheney years and not run anybody, just say that it's time for the Democrats to go back into the White House.
We can wait. GIBSON: All right. We'll take a commercial break. We will come back to the Democratic debate from the city of Philadelphia, before the Pennsylvania primary. We'll continue. Stay with us.
Yes, I am, Charlie. And here's why. Thankfully, we have a system in our country, of civilian control of the military. And our professional military are the best in the world. They give their best advice. And then they execute the policies of the president.
I have watched this president, as he has continued to change the rationale and move the goal posts when it comes to Iraq. And I am convinced that it is in America's best interests, it is in the best interests of our military, and I even believe it is in the best interests of Iraq that upon taking office I will ask the secretary of defense and the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and my security advisers to immediately put together for me a plan so that I can begin to withdraw within 60 days.
I will make it very clear that we will do so in a responsible and careful manner because, obviously, withdrawing troops and equipment, is dangerous. I will also make it clear to the Iraqis that they no longer have a blank check from the president of the United States.
Because I believe that it will be only through our commitment to withdrawal that the Iraqis will begin to do what they have failed to do for all of these years. I will also begin an intensive diplomatic effort, both within the region and internationally, to begin to try to get other countries to understand the stakes that we all face when it comes to the future of Iraq.
But I have been convinced and very clear that I will begin to withdraw troops within 60 days. And we've had other instances in our history where some military commanders have been very publicly opposed to what a president was proposing to do. But I think it's important that this decision be made. And I intend to make it.
No, what I'm saying, Charlie, is that no one can predict what will happen. There are many different scenarios.
But one thing I am sure of is that our staying in Iraq, our continuing to lose our men and women in uniform, having many injured, the Iraqi casualties that we are seeing, as well, is there -- is no way for us to maintain a strong position in the world.
It's not only about Iraq. It is about ending the war in Iraq so that we can begin paying attention to all of the other problems we have.
There isn't any doubt that Afghanistan has been neglected. It has not gotten the resources that it needs. We hear that from our military commanders responsible for that region of the world.
And there are other problems that we have failed to address.
Well, in fact, George, I think that we should be looking to create an umbrella of deterrence that goes much further than just Israel. Of course, I would make it clear to the Iranians that an attack on Israel would incur massive retaliation from the United States.
But I would do the same with other countries in the region. We are at a very dangerous point with Iran. The Bush policy has failed. Iran has not been deterred. They continue to try to not only obtain the fissile material for nuclear weapons, but they are intent upon using their efforts to intimidate the region and to have their way when it comes to the support of terrorism in Lebanon and elsewhere.
And I think that this is an opportunity, with skillful diplomacy, for the United States, to go to the region and enlist the region in a security agreement vis-a-vis Iran.
Well, George, I have made a commitment that I will let the taxes on people making more than $250,000 a year go back to the rates that they were paying in the 1990s.
Yes, and here's why. Number one, I do not believe that it will detrimentally affect the economy by doing that. As I recall, you know, we used that tool during the 1990s to very good effect. And I think we can do so again.
I am absolutely committed to not raising a single tax on middle- class Americans, people making less than $250,000 a year.
No. That's right. That is my commitment.
Well, let me start by saying that I think we know that we've got to get back to an economy that works for everyone. The president has been very good for people who are doing well. And that's great. But it was better for our country when we had an economy that lifted everyone up at the same time.
And we had that during the 1990s. You know, 22.7 million new jobs. More people lifted out of poverty than any time in our recent history. The typical family saw $7,000 increase in income. And we have lost that.
You know, now, the typical family has lost at least $1,000. And the fact is that, you know, I don't want to take one more penny of tax money from anybody. But what I want to do is make some smart investments. And I was the first to come out with the strategic energy fund, where we need to be investing in clean, renewable energy. And I think we can put 5 million Americans to work.
I think we need to invest in our infrastructure. That also will get the economy moving again. And I believe we can put about 3 million people to work, and good union jobs, where people get a good wage with a good set of benefits that can support a middle class family with a rising standard of living.
I want to see us actually tackle the housing crisis, something I've been talking about for over a year. If I had been president a year ago, I believe we would have begun to avoid some of the worst of the mortgage and credit crisis because we would have started much earlier than we have.
I wouldn't raise it above the 20 percent, if I raised it at all. I would not raise it above what it was during the Clinton administration.
You know, Charlie, I'm going to have to look and see what the revenue situation is. You know, we now have the largest budget deficit we've ever had, $311 billion. We went from a $5.6 trillion projected surplus, to what we have today, which is a $9 trillion debt. I don't want to raise taxes against on anybody.
Well, in fact, I am totally committed to making sure Social Security is solvent. If we had stayed on the path we were on at the end of my husband's administration, we sure would be in a lot better position, because we had a plan to extend the life of the Social Security Trust Fund and, again, President Bush decided that that wasn't a priority, that the war in Iraq and tax cuts for the wealthiest of Americans were his priorities, neither of which he's ever paid for.
I think it's the first time we've ever been taken to war and had a president who wouldn't pay for it.
But when it comes to Social Security, fiscal responsibility is the first and most important step. You've got to begin to rein in the budget, pay as you go, to try to replenish our Social Security Trust Fund.
And, with all due respect, the last time we had a crisis in Social Security was 1983. President Reagan and Speaker Tip O'Neill came up with a commission. That was the best and smartest way, because you've got to get Republicans and Democrats together. That's what I will do.
And I will say, number one, don't cut benefits on current beneficiaries. They're already having a hard enough time. And, number two, do not impose additional tax burdens on middle-class families.
There are lots of ways we can fix Social Security that don't impose those burdens, and I will do that.
But there are more progressive ways of doing it than, you know, lifting the cap. And I think we'll work it out. I have every confidence we're going to work it out. I know that we can make this happen.
Well, Charlie, on Friday, I was with Mayor Nutter, who is here, in west Philadelphia, at the YMCA there, to talk about what we could do together to bring down the crime rate that has ravaged Philadelphia.
You know, more than one person, on average, a day is murdered in Philadelphia. And Mayor Nutter is very committed, as the mayor of this great city, to try to do what he can to stem the violence.
And what I said then is what I have been saying, that I will be a good partner for cities like Philadelphia as president, because I will bring back the COPS program, the so-called COPS program, where we had 100,000 police on the streets, which really helped drive down the crime rate and also helped create better community relations.
I will also work to reinstate the assault weapons ban. We had it during the 1990s. It really was an aid to our police officers, who are now, once again, because it has lapsed and the Republicans will not reinstate it, are being outgunned on our streets by these military-style weapons.
I will also work to make sure that police departments in Philadelphia, Pittsburgh, Harrisburg, across America, get access to the federal information that will enable them to track illegal guns. Because the numbers are astounding. Probably 80 percent of the guns used in gun crimes are in the hands of that criminal, that gang member, unfortunately people who are sometimes, you know, mentally challenged, because it got there illegally. And under the Republicans, that information was kept from local law enforcement.
You know, George, I want to give local communities the opportunity to have some authority over determining how to keep their citizens safe.
This case you're referring to before the Supreme Court is apparently dividing the Bush administration. You know, the Bush administration basically said, "We don't have enough facts to know whether or not it is appropriate."
And Vice President Cheney, who you know is a fourth, special branch of government all unto himself, has actually filed a brief, saying, "Oh, no, we have to -- you know, he have to prevent D.C. from doing this."
What I support is sensible regulation that is consistent with the constitutional right to own and bear arms.
Well, I think a total ban with no exceptions under any circumstances might be found by the court not to be, but I don't know the facts.
But I don't think that should blow open a hole that says that D.C. or Philadelphia or anybody else cannot come up with sensible regulations to protect their people and keep, you know, machine guns and assault weapons out of the hands of folks who shouldn't have them.
What I favor is what works in New York. You know, we have a set of rules in New York City, and we have a totally different set of rules in the rest of the state. What might work in New York City is certainly not going to work in Montana.
I was for the New York rules; that's right. I was for the New York rules, because they have worked over time. And there isn't a lot uproar in New York about changing them, because I go to upstate New York, where we have a lot of hunters and people who are collectors and people who are sport shooters. They have every reason to believe that their rights are being respected.
You walk down the street with a police officer in Manhattan, he wants to be sure that there is some way of protecting him and protecting the people that are in his charge.
Well, here's the way I'd prefer to think about it. I think we've got to have affirmative action generally to try to give more opportunities to young people from disadvantaged backgrounds, whoever they are.
That's why I'm a strong supporter of early childhood education and universal pre-kindergarten.
That's why I'm against No Child Left Behind as it is currently operating, and I would end it, because we can do so much better to have an education system that really focuses in on kids who need extra help.
That's why I'm in favor of much more college aid, not these outrageous predatory student loan rates that are charging people I've met across Pennsylvania, 20, 25, 28 percent interest rates.
Let's make college affordable again. See I think we have to look at what we're trying to achieve here somewhat differently. We do have a real gap. We have a gap in achievement. We have a gap in income. But we don't have a potential gap. I think our job should be to try to create the conditions that enable people to live up to their god- given potential. That means health care for everyone, no exceptions. Nobody left out.
And it means taking a hard look at what we need to do to compete and win in the global economy. So that's how I prefer to think about it. Let's affirmatively invest in our young people and make it possible for them to have a good, middle-class life, in today's much more competitive economy.
I met with a group of truckers in Harrisburg about a week and a half ago and here's what I told them. No. 1, we are going to investigate these gas prices. The federal government has certain tools that this administration will not use. And the Federal Trade Commission, and other ways, through the Justice Department.
Because I believe there is market manipulation going on, particularly among energy traders. We've seen this movie before, in Enron, and we've got to get to the bottom to make sure we're not being taken advantage of.
Number two, I would quit putting oil into the strategic petroleum reserve. And I would release some to help drive down the price globally. And thirdly, if there is any kind of gas tax moratorium, as some people are now proposing --
Like John McCain and some Democrats, frankly. I think Senator Menendez and others have said that we may have to do something because when you get to $4 a gallon gas, people are not going to be able to afford to drive to work.
And what I would like to see us do is say, if we have that, then we should have a windfall profits tax on these outrageous profits of the oil companies, and put that money back into the highway trust funds so that we don't lose out on repair and construction and rebuilding.
But ultimately Charlie, we've got to have a long-term energy strategy. We are so much more dependent on foreign oil today than we were on 9/11. That is a real indictment of our leadership. I've laid out a comprehensive plan to move us toward energy independence that I hope I will have the opportunity to implement as president.
I'm going to have to give some serious thought to that. I do believe that it's a way to unify our country. I thought that President Bush was right when he asked his father and Bill to represent us during the aftermath of the tsunami. I thought it sent a great message here at home and around the world. And I'm sure there will be opportunities to ask all the former presidents to work on behalf of our nation. You know, we've got to come together and the former presidents really exemplify that, whether one agrees with them politically or not. When they're all together representing our country, that sends a strong message. And I would look for a way to use all of our former presidents. But that will take some careful thought on my part.
Well, I say to them what I've said to voters across America, that we need a fighter back in the White House. We need someone who's going to take on the special interests.
And I have a plan to take away $55 billion of the giveaways and the subsidies that the president and Congress have lavished on the drug companies, and the oil companies, and the insurance companies, and Wall Street.
And I have a plan to give that money back, give it back in tax cuts to the middle class, people who deserve it, who have been struggling under this president, who feel invisible, who feel like, you know, they're not even seen anymore.
And we're going to make everybody feel like they're part of the American family again. And we're going to tackle the problems that have been waiting for a champion back in the White House.
Now, obviously, I can't do this alone. I can only do it if I get people who believe in me, and support me, and who look at my track record and know that, you know, I've spent a lifetime trying to empower people, trying to fight for them.
And I think it's going to be challenging, but it is absolutely what we must do in order to keep faith with our country and to give our children the future that they deserve. So I will tell everyone who listens that I'm ready to be the commander-in-chief. I've 35 generals and admirals, including two former chairmen of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, General Wesley Clark and others, who believe that I am the person to lead us out of Iraq, to take on Al Qaida, to rebuild our military.
And I will turn this economy around. We will get back to shared prosperity. And we will see, once again, that we can do this the right way so it's not just a government of the few, by the few, and for the few.
And I need your help. I need the help of the voters here in Pennsylvania, first and foremost, in order to be able to get to those conversations. And I hope that I have demonstrated not just over the last weeks or even over the last hour-and-a-half, but over a lifetime that you can count on me.
You know where I stand. You know that I will fight for you and that, together, we're going to take back our country.

And then, when the celebrations are over, the next president will walk into the Oval Office, and waiting there will be a stack of problems, problems inherited from a failed administration: a war to end in Iraq and a war to resolve in Afghanistan; an economy that is not working for the vast majority of Americans, but well for the wealthy and the well-connected; tens of millions of people either without health insurance at all or with insurance that doesn't amount to much, because it won't pay what your doctor or your hospital need...
And among the many contributions that they have made, both by their personal example of courage and leadership, is their reminder that in this land of such plenty and blessings, there are still 37 million Americans who are living below the poverty line and many others barely hanging on above.
Well, I want to start by saying that whatever differences there are among us, between us now, it's hard to forget between -- we keep talking about all those who aren't here.
But the differences between Barack and I pale in comparison to the differences that we have with Republicans, and I want to say that first and foremost, because it's really...
Well, let me start by saying that this is the passionate cause of my public service.
I started trying to expand health care many years ago, first to children, then to rural areas in Arkansas, and obviously tackled it during my husband's administration. And the reason why I have designed a plan that, number one, tells people, if you have health insurance and you are happy with it, nothing changes, is because we want to maximize choice for people.
So, if you are satisfied, you're not one of the people who will necessarily, at this time, take advantage of what I'm offering. But if you are uninsured or underinsured, we will open the congressional health plan to you.
And contrary to...
Well, it was an effort to try to begin this conversation, which we're now continuing. It has been a difficult conversation. There have been a lot of efforts.
And I'm proud that one of the efforts I was involved in 10 years ago resulted in the Children's Health Insurance Program. We now have a million children in California...
And, certainly, it is important that the president come up with the plan, but we'll have to persuade Congress to put all of those deliberations on C-SPAN. Now, I think we might be able to do that, but that's a little heavier lift than what the president is going to propose, because what happens is we have to have a coalition.
And I think the plan that I have proposed is if you take business, which pays the costs and wants to get those costs down, take labor that has to negotiate over health care instead of wages, take doctors, nurses, hospitals who want to get back into the business of taking care of people instead of working for insurance companies, I think we will have a coalition that can withstand the health insurance...
... and the drug companies.
And that's what I intend to do.
Well, let me say that the way I would pay for this is to take the Bush tax cuts that are set to expire on people making more than $250,000 a year. That would raise about $55 billion and I would put that into the subsidies for the health care tax credit, so that people would be able to afford the health care that we are offering.
The other $55 billion would come from the modernization and the efficiencies that I believe we can obtain. We spend more money than anybody in the world on health care and there is no end in sight.
Yet, we don't get the best results. We don't have the longest life span. We don't have the best infant mortality rates.
That's right.
Absolutely. Absolutely.
But Wolf, it's just really important to underscore here that we will go back to the tax rates we had before George Bush became president. And my memory is, people did really well during that time period.
Well, let me start with the original question from Kim, because I think it deserves an answer.
I believe that in many parts of our country, because of employers who exploit undocumented workers and drive down wages, there are job losses. And I think we should be honest about that.
And therefore, it's imperative we approach it this way, only after people have agreed to these conditions, Doyle, and that they have been willing to say, yes, they will meet those conditions, do I think we ought to talk about privileges like drives' licenses? Because otherwise, I think you will further undermine the labor market for people like the ones Kim is referring to.
We need to solve this problem, not exacerbate it. And that's what intend to do as president.
Well, actually, I co-sponsored comprehensive immigration reform in 2004 before Barack came to the Senate.
If you want to round up into four people, how many tens of thousands of federal law enforcement officials would that take?"
And how much authority would they have to be given to knock on every door of every business and every home? I don't think Americans would stand for that.
So we have to get realistic and practical about this.
Well, we disagree on this. I do not think that it is either appropriate to give a driver's license to someone who is here undocumented, putting them, frankly, at risk, because that is clear evidence that they are not here legally, and I believe it is a diversion from what should be the focus at creating a political coalition with the courage to stand up and change the immigration system.
Well...
Well, I just have to correct the record for one second, because, obviously, we do agree about the need to have comprehensive immigration reform.
And if I recall, about a week after I said that I would try to support my governor, although I didn't agree with it personally, you
We want to -- we want to be fair to people. We want to respect the dignity of every human being, every person who is here. But we are trying to work our way through to get to where we need to be and that is to have a united Democratic Party, with fair-minded Republicans who will join us to fix this broken immigration system.
And I really spent a great deal of my early adulthood, you know, bringing people together to help solve the problems of those who were without a voice and were certainly powerless.
I was honored to be appointed by President Carter to the Legal Services Corporation, which I chaired, and we grew that corporation from 100 million to 300 million. It is the primary vehicle by which people are given access to our courts when they have civil problems that need to be taken care of.
You know, I've run projects that provided aid for prisoners in prisons. I helped to reform the education system in Arkansas and expand rural health care. And I've had a lot of varied experiences, both in the private sector, as well as the public, and the not-for- profit sector.
And certainly during the eight years that I was privileged to be in the White House, I had a great deal of responsibility that was given to me to not only work on domestic issues, like health care -- and when we weren't successful on universal health care, I just turned around and said, well, we're going to get the Children's Health Insurance Program. And I'm so proud we do, because now six million children around the country every month get health care. And I took on the drug companies to make sure that they would test drugs to see if they were safe and effective for our kids.
And began to change the adoption and foster care system. Here in California, because of the Adoption and Safe Families Act, we have three times more children being adopted out of foster care.
Well, I would, with all due respect, say that the United States government is much more than a business. It is a trust.
Well, I have the greatest respect for Senator Kennedy and the Kennedy family. And I'm proud to have three of Senator Robert Kennedy's children, Bobby and Kathleen and Kerry, supporting me. But what I this is...
But, of course, despite the enthusiasm of our supporters or our endorsers -- and we're both proud of everyone who has come to be part of our campaign -- this is about the two of us.
You have to, as voters, determine who you think can be the best president, to tackle all those problems on day one, waiting in the Oval Office, who can be the best nominee for the Democratic Party to be able to withstand whatever they decide to do on the other side of the aisle, and come out victorious.
But, ultimately, this is really about the American people. It's about your lives. It's about your jobs, your health care, whether you can afford to send your children to college, whether you'll be able to withstand the pressure of the rising interest rates on a home foreclosure that might come your way, and whether we're going to once again be proud of our country, and our leadership, and our moral authority in the world.
And so I think that, as we look at these upcoming contests -- 22 of them now on Tuesday -- really, every voter should be looking and examining what they want out of the next president.
What are the criteria that you have for determining who you will vote for, what you think our country needs, what you and your family are really looking for? And then you evaluate the two of us, because no one else will be on the ballot.
This is a very exciting and humbling experience, I think I can say for both of us.
Neither one of us would have either predicted -- you know, not very long ago -- we would be sitting here. And it is a great tribute to the Democratic Party and to America.
Well, as I have often said, I regret deeply that there is a Bush in the White House at the time.
But I think that what's great about our political system is that we are all judged on our own merits. We come forward to the American public and it's the most grueling political process one can imagine.
Well, because, Doyle, I've been very clear in saying that I will begin to withdraw troops in 60 days. I believe that it will take me one to two brigades a month, depending on how many troops we have there, and that nearly all of them should be out within a year.
I certainly hope it will be. And I've said I hope to have nearly all of them out within a year.
And of course...
Really?
We're having -- we're having such a good time.
We're having such a good time. We are. We are. We're having a wonderful time.
And I am so -- I am so proud to have the support of leaders like Congresswoman Maxine Waters, who is here with us tonight, who was one of the -- who was one of the original conveners of the Out of Iraq Caucus. Because it is imperative that as we move forward, with what will be a very difficult process -- there are no good options here.
Well, we are saying absolutely no. And we're going to do everything we can to prevent him from binding any of us, going into the future, in a way that will undermine America's interests. So that's a critical issue.
Well, Howard, that's an important question. And the reason is because, although I believe strongly that we needed to put inspectors in, that was the underlying reason why I at least voted to give President Bush the authority, put those inspectors in, let them do their work, figure out what is there and what isn't there.
And I have the greatest respect for my friend and colleague, Senator Levin. He's my chairman on the Senate Armed Services Committee.
The way that amendment was drafted suggested that the United States would subordinate whatever our judgment might be going forward to the United Nations Security Council. I don't think that was a good precedent. Therefore, I voted against it.
I did vote with Senator Byrd to limit the authority that was being given to President Bush to one year, and that also was not approved.
You know, I've said many times if I had known then what I know now, I never would have given President Bush the authority. It was a sincere vote based on my assessment at the time and what I believed he would do with the authority he was given.
Well, Wolf, I think that if you look at what was going on at the time -- and certainly, I did an enormous amount of investigation and due diligence to try to determine what if any threat could flow from the history of Saddam Hussein being both an owner of and a seeker of weapons of mass destruction.
The idea of putting inspectors back in -- that was a credible idea. I believe in coercive diplomacy. I think that you try to figure out how to move bad actors in a direction that you prefer in order to avoid more dire consequences.
And if you took it on the face of it and if you took it on the basis of what we hoped would happen with the inspectors going in, that in and of itself was a policy that we've used before. We have used the threat of force to try to make somebody change their behavior.
I think what no one could have fully appreciated is how obsessed this president was with this particular mission. And unfortunately, I and others who warned at the time, who said, let the inspectors finish their work, you know, do not wage a preemptive war, use diplomacy, were just talking to a brick wall.
But you know, it's clear that if I had been president, we would have never diverted our attention from Afghanistan. When I went to Afghanistan the first time and was met by a young soldier from New York, in the 10th Mountain Division who told me that I was being welcomed to the forgotten frontlines in the war against terror, that just, you know, just struck me so forcefully.
We need a president who will be sensitive to the implications of the use of force and understand that force should be a last resort, not a first resort.
No, that's not what you heard me say.
You know, I think that, you know, that is a good try, Wolf.
He has a spouse, too.
Well, one thing I think is fair to say, both Barack and I have very passionate spouses...
... who promote and defend us at every turn.
You know, but the fact is that I'm running for president, and this is my campaign.
Well, I have to agree with everything Barack just said.
This has been an extraordinary campaign, and I think both of us have been overwhelmed by the response that we have engendered, the kind of enthusiasm and intensity that people feel about each of us. And so, clearly, we are both dedicated to doing the best we can to win the nomination, but there is no doubt we will have a unified Democratic Party.

Well, we meet tonight here in Philadelphia where
our founders determined that the promise of America would be available
for future generations if we were willing and able to make it happen.
You know, I am here, as is Senator Obama. Neither of us were
included in those original documents. But in a very real sense, we
demonstrate that that promise of America is alive and well. But it is
at risk.
There is a lot of concern across Pennsylvania and America.
People do feel as though their government is not solving problems,
that it is not standing up for them, that we've got to do more to
actually provide the good jobs that will support families, deal once
and for all with health care for every American, make our education
system the true passport to opportunity, restore our standing in the
world.
I am running for president because I know we can meet the
challenges of today, that we can continue to fulfill that promise that
was offered to successive generations of Americans starting here so
long ago.
And I hope that this evening, voters in Pennsylvania and others
across the country will listen carefully to what we have to say, will
look at our records, will look at the plans we have.
And I offer those on my website, hillaryclinton.com, for more
detail. Because I believe with all my heart that we the people can
have the kind of future that our children and grandchildren so richly
deserve.
Well, Charlie, I'm going to do everything I
possibly can to make sure that one of us takes the oath of office next
January. I think that has to be the overriding goal, whatever we have
to do.
Obviously we are still contesting to determine who will be the
nominee. But once that is resolved, I think it is absolutely
imperative that our entire party close ranks, that we become unified.
I will do everything to make sure that the people who supported
me support our nominee.
I will go anywhere in the country to make the case. And I know that
Barack feels the same way, because both of us have spent 15 months
traveling our country. I have seen the damage of the Bush years.
I've seen the extraordinary pain that people have suffered from
because of the failed policies; you know, those who have held my hands
who have lost sons or daughters in Iraq, and those who have lost sons
or daughters because they didn't have health insurance.
And so, regardless of the differences there may be between us,
and they are differences, they pale in comparison to the differences
between us and Senator McCain.
So we will certainly do whatever is necessary to make sure that a
Democrat is in the White House next January.
Well, I am the granddaughter of a factory worker
from Scranton who went to work in the Scranton lace mills when he was
11 years old, worked his entire life there, mostly six-day weeks.
He was also very active in the Court Street Methodist Church.
And he raised three sons and was very proud that he sent all of them
to college.
I don't believe that my grandfather or my father, or the many
people whom I have had the privilege of knowing and meeting across
Pennsylvania over many years, cling to religion when Washington is not
listening to them. I think that is a fundamental, sort of,
misunderstanding of the role of religion and faith in times that are
good and times that are bad.
And I similarly don't think that people cling to their
traditions, like hunting and guns, either when they are frustrated
with the government. I just don't believe that's how people live
their lives.
Now, that doesn't mean that people are not frustrated with the
government. We have every reason to be frustrated, particularly with
this administration.
But I can see why people would be taken aback and offended by the
remarks. And I think what's important is that we all listen to one
another and we respect one another and we understand the different
decisions that people make in life, because we're a stronger country
because of that.
And certainly the weeks that I have spent criss-crossing
Pennsylvania, from Erie to Lancaster County, and meeting a lot of
wonderful people, says to me that despite whatever frustration anyone
has with our government, people are resilient, they are positive, and
they're ready for leadership again that will summon them to something
greater than themselves, and that we will deliver on that if given a
chance.
Well, I think we have to beat John McCain, and I
have every reason to believe we're going to have a Democratic
president and it's going to be either Barack or me. And we're going
to make that happen.
And what is important is that we understand exactly the
challenges facing us in order to defeat Senator McCain.
He will be a formidable candidate. There isn't any doubt about
that. He has a great American story to tell. He's a man who has
served our country with distinction over many years, but he has the
wrong ideas about America. And those ideas will be tested in the
cauldron of this campaign.
But I also know, having now gone through 16 years of being on the
receiving end of what the Republican Party dishes out, how important
it is that we try to go after every single vote everywhere we possibly
can to get to those electoral votes that we're going to need to have
the next president elected.
Yes. Yes. Yes.
Now, I think that I can do a better job. (Laughter.) I mean,
obviously, that's why I'm here. I think I am better able and better
prepared in large measure because of what I've been through and the
work that I've done and the results that I've produced for people and
the coalition that I have put together in this campaign, that Charlie
referred to earlier.
Obviously, I believe I would be the best president, or I would
not still be here, standing on this stage, and I believe I'm the
better and stronger candidate against Senator McCain, to go toe to toe
with him on national security and on how we turn the economy around.
Well, could I --
Oh, I do.
Well, first of all, I want to be very clear. My comments were
about your remarks.
And I think that's important, because it wasn't just me responding to
them, it was people who heard them, people who felt as though they
were aimed at their values, their quality of life, the decisions that
they have made.
Now, obviously, what we have to do as Democrats is make sure we
get enough votes to win in November. And as George just said, you
know, the Republicans, who are pretty shrewd about what it takes to
win, certainly did jump on the comments.
But what's important here is what we each stand for and what our
records are and what we have done over the course of our lives to try
to improve the circumstances of those who deserve to live up to their
own potential, to make the decisions that are right for them and their
families. And I think year after year for now 35 years, I have a
proven record of results.
And what I'm taking into this campaign is my passion for
empowering people, for giving people the feeling that they can make a
better future for themselves. And I think it's important that that
starts from a base of respect and connection in order to be able to
get people to follow you and believe that you will lead them in the
better direction.
I was asked a personal question, Charlie, and I
gave a personal answer. Obviously, one's choice of church and pastor
is rooted in what one believes is what you're seeking in church and
what kind of, you know, fellowship you find in church. But I have to
say that, you know, for Pastor Wright to have given his first sermon
after 9/11 and to have blamed the United States for the attack, which
happened in my city of New York, would have been intolerable for me.
And therefore I would have not been able to stay in the church, and
maybe it's, you know, just, again, a personal reflection that
regardless of whatever good is going on -- and I have no reason to
doubt that a lot of good things were happening in that church -- you
get to choose your pastor. You don't choose your family, but you get
to choose your pastor. And when asked a direct question, I said I
would not have stayed in the church.
Well, I think, in addition to the questions about
Reverend Wright and what he said and when he said it, and for whatever
reason he might have said these things, there were so many different
variations on the explanations that we heard. And it is something
that I think deserves further exploration, because clearly what we've
got to figure out is how we're going to bring people together in a way
that overcomes the anger, overcomes the divisiveness and whatever
bitterness there may be out there.
It is clear that, as leaders, we have a choice who we associate
with and who we apparently give some kind of seal of approval to. And
I think that it wasn't only the specific remarks, but some of the
relationships with Reverend Farrakhan, with giving the church bulletin
over to the leader of Hamas to put a message in. You know, these are
problems, and they raise questions in people's minds.
And so this is a legitimate area, as everything is when we run
for office, for people to be exploring and trying to find answers.
Well, Tom, I can tell you that I may be a lot ofthings, but I'm not dumb. And I wrote about going to Bosnia in mybook in 2004. I laid it all out there. And you're right. On acouple of occasions in the last weeks I just said some things thatweren't in keeping with what I knew to be the case and what I hadwritten about in my book. And, you know, I'm embarrassed by it. Ihave apologized for it. I've said it was a mistake. And it is, Ihope, something that you can look over, because clearly I am proudthat I went to Bosnia. It was a war zone.General Wesley Clark is here in the audience with me as one of mymajor supporters. He and I were talking about it before I came out.You know, our soldiers were there to try to police and keep the peacein a very dangerous area. They were totally in battle gear. Therewere concerns about the potential dangers. The former president ofBosnia has said that he was worried about the safety of the situation.So I know that it is something that some people have said, "Waita minute. What happened here?" But I have talked about this andwritten about it. And then, unfortunately, on a few occasions I wasnot as accurate as I have been in the past.But I know too that, you know, being able to rely on myexperience of having gone to Bosnia, gone to more than 80 countries,having represented the United States in so many different settingsgives me a tremendous advantage going into this campaign, particularlyagainst Senator McCain.So I will either try to get more sleep, Tom, or, you know, havesomebody who, you know, is there as a reminder to me. You know, youcan go back for the past 15 months. We both have said things that,you know, turned out not to be accurate. You know, that happens whenyou're talking as much as we have talked.But you know, I'm very sorry that I said it. And I have saidthat, you know, it just didn't jibe with what I had written about andknew to be the truth.
(Laughs.)
Well, I think that is a fair general statement,but I also believe that Senator Obama served on a board with Mr. Ayersfor a period of time, the Woods Foundation, which was a paiddirectorship position.And if I'm not mistaken, that relationship with Mr. Ayers on thisboard continued after 9/11 and after his reported comments, which weredeeply hurtful to people in New York, and I would hope to everyAmerican, because they were published on 9/11 and he said that he wasjust sorry they hadn't done more. And what they did was set bombs andin some instances people died. So it is -- you know, I think it is,again, an issue that people will be asking about. And I have no doubt-- I know Senator Obama's a good man and I respect him greatly but Ithink that this is an issue that certainly the Republicans will beraising.And it goes to this larger set of concerns about, you know, howwe are going to run against John McCain. You know, I wish theRepublicans would apologize for the disaster of the Bush-Cheney yearsand not run anybody, just say that it's time for the Democrats to goback into the White House. (Laughter, applause.)know that they're going to be out there, full force. And you know,I've been in this arena for a long time. I have a lot of baggage, andeverybody has rummaged through it for years. (Laughter.) And sotherefore, I have, you know, an opportunity to come to this campaignwith a very strong conviction and feeling that I will be able towithstand whatever the Republican sends our way.
I've noticed. (Laughs.)
We can wait.
Yes, I am, Charlie. And here's why: You know,thankfully we have a system in our country of civilian control of themilitary. And our professional military are the best in the world.They give their best advice and then they execute the policies of thepresident. I have watched this president as he has continued tochange the rationale and move the goalposts when it comes to Iraq.And I am convinced that it is in America's best interest, it isin the best interest of our military, and I even believe it is in thebest interest of Iraq, that upon taking office, I will ask thesecretary of Defense and the Joint Chiefs of Staff and my securityadvisers to immediately put together for me a plan so that I can beginto withdraw within 60 days. I will make it very clear that we will doso in a responsible and careful manner, because obviously, withdrawingtroops and equipment is dangerous.I will also make it clear to the Iraqis that they no longer havea blank check from the president of the United States, because Ibelieve that it will be only through our commitment to withdraw thatthe Iraqis will begin to do what they have failed to do for all ofthese years.I will also begin an intensive diplomatic effort, both within theregion and internationally, to begin to try to get other countries tounderstand the stakes that we all face when it comes to the future ofIraq.But I have been convinced and very clear that I will begin towithdraw troops within 60 days. And we've had other instances in ourhistory where some military commanders have been very publicly opposedto what a president was proposing to do.But I think it's important that this decision be made, and I intend tomake it.
No, what I'm saying, Charlie, is that no one canpredict what will happen. There are many different scenarios. Butone thing I am sure of is that our staying in Iraq, our continuing tolose our men and women in uniform, having many injured, the Iraqicasualties that we are seeing as well, is -- is no way for us tomaintain a strong position in the world.It's not only about Iraq. It is about ending the war in Iraq, sothat we can begin paying attention to all of the other problems wehave. There isn't any doubt that Afghanistan has been neglected. Ithas not gotten the resources that it needs. We hear that from ourmilitary commanders responsible for that region of the world. Andthere are other problems that we have failed to address.So the bottom line for me is, we don't know what will happen aswe withdraw. We do know what will happen if we stay mired in Iraq.The Iraqi government will not accept responsibility for its ownfuture.Our military will continue to be stretched thin, and our soldiers willbe on their second, third, even their fourth deployment. And we willnot be able to reassert our leadership and our moral authority in theworld.And I think those are the kind of broad issues that a presidenthas to take into account.
Well, in fact, George, I think that we should belooking to create an umbrella of deterrence that goes much furtherthan just Israel. Of course I would make it clear to the Iraniansthat an attack on Israel would incur massive retaliation from theUnited States, but I would do the same with other countries in theregion.You know, we are at a very dangerous point with Iran. The Bushpolicy has failed. Iran has not been deterred. They continue to tryto not only obtain the fissile material for nuclear weapons but theyare intent upon and using their efforts to intimidate the region andto have their way when it comes to the support of terrorism in Lebanonand elsewhere.And I think that this is an opportunity, with skillful diplomacy,for the United States to go to the region and enlist the region in asecurity agreement vis-a-vis Iran. It would give us three tools wedon't now have.Number one, we've got to begin diplomatic engagement with Iran,and we want the region and the world to understand how serious we areabout it. And I would begin those discussions at a low level. Icertainly would not meet with Ahmadinejad, because even again today hemade light of 9/11 and said he's not even sure it happened and thatpeople actually died. He's not someone who would have an opportunityto meet with me in the White House. But I would have a diplomaticprocess that would engage him.And secondly, we've got to deter other countries from feelingthat they have to acquire nuclear weapons. You can't go to the Saudisor the Kuwaitis or UAE and others who have a legitimate concern about
Iran and say: Well, don't acquire these weapons to defend yourselfunless you're also willing to say we will provide a deterrent backupand we will let the Iranians know that. Yes, an attack on Israelwould trigger massive retaliation, but so would an attack on thosecountries that are willing to go under this security umbrella andforswear their own nuclear ambitions.And finally we cannot permit Iran to become a nuclear weaponspower. And this administration has failed in our efforts to convincethe rest of the world that that is a danger, not only to us and notjust to Israel but to the region and beyond.Therefore we have got to have this process that reaches out,beyond even who we would put under the security umbrella, to get therest of the world on our side to try to impose the kind of sanctionsand diplomatic efforts that might prevent this from occurring.
Well, George, I have made a commitment that I willlet the taxes on people making more than $250,000 a year go back tothe rates that they were paying in the 1990s.
Yes. And here's why: Number one, I do notbelieve that it will detrimentally affect the economy by doing that.As I recall, you know, we used that tool during the 1990s to very goodeffect and I think we can do so again.I am absolutely committed to not raising a single tax on middleclass Americans, people making less than $250,000 a year. In fact, Ihave a very specific plan of $100 billion in tax cuts that would go tohelp people afford health care, security retirement plans, you know,make it possible for people to get long-term care insurance and carefor their parents and grandparents who they are trying to support,making college affordable and so much else.Well, if you look at how we'd have to sequence that, we might notbe able to do all of that at once. But if you go to my website,HillaryClinton.com, it is laid out there how I will pay foreverything, because everything I have proposed, I have put in how Iwould pay for it.
No, that's right. That is my commitment.
Well, let me start by saying that I think we knowthat we've got to get back to an economy that works for everyone. Thepresident has been very good for people who are doing well, and that'sgreat. But it was better for our country when we had an economy thatlifted everyone up at the same time, and we had that during the 1990s;you know, 22.7 million new jobs, more people lifted out of povertythan any time in our recent history. A typical family saw a $7,000increase in income.And we have lost that. You know, now the typical family has lostat least $1,000. And the fact is that, you know, I don't want to takeone more penny of tax money from anybody. But what I want to do ismake some smart investments. And I was the first to come out with astrategic energy fund, where we need to be investing in cleanrenewable energy. And I think we could put 5 million Americans towork.I think we have to invest in our infrastructure. That also willget the economy moving again, and I believe we could put about 3million people to work in good union jobs where people get a good wagewith a good set of benefits that can support a middle-class familywith a rising standard of living.I want to see us actually tackle the housing crisis, somethingI've been talking about for over a year. If I had been president ayear ago, I believe we would have begun to avoid some of the worst ofthe mortgage and credit crisis, because we would have started muchearlier than we have -- in fact, I don't think we've really done verymuch at all yet -- in dealing with a way of freezing homeforeclosures, of freezing interest rates, getting money intocommunities to be able to withstand the problems that are caused byforeclosures.Governor Rendell has done a great job in Pennsylvania. He sawthis coming. And unlike our current president, who either didn't knowit or didn't care about it, he has really held the line, andPennsylvania has been much less affected by home foreclosures. Butthe president hasn't done that, and what I have proposed would dothat.So you've got to look at the entire economy. And from myperspective, yes, taxes is a piece of it. But you've got to figureout what is it we would invest in that would make us richer and saferand stronger tomorrow, which would (be ?) helping everybody.
I wouldn't raise it above the 20 percent if Iraised it at all. I would not raise it above what it was during theClinton administration.
You know, Charlie, I'm going to have to look andsee what the revenue situation is. You know, we now have the largestbudget deficit we've ever had, $311 billion. We went from a $5.6trillion projected surplus to what we have today, which is a $9trillion debt.I don't want to raise taxes on anybody. I'm certainly againstone of Senator Obama's ideas, which is to lift the cap on the payrolltax, because that would impose additional taxes on people who are, youknow, educators here in the Philadelphia area or in the suburbs,police officers, firefighters and the like.So I think we have to be very careful about how we navigate this.So the $250,000 mark is where I am sure we're going. But beyond that,we're going to have to look and see where we are.
Well, in fact, I am totally committed to makingsure Social Security is solvent. If we had stayed on the path we wereon at the end of my husband's administration, we sure would be in alot better position because we had a plan to extend the life of theSocial Security Trust Fund and again, President Bush decided that thatwasn't a priority, that the war in Iraq and tax cuts for thewealthiest of Americans were his priorities, neither of which he'sever paid for. I think it's the first time we've ever been taken towar and had a president who wouldn't pay for it.But when it comes to Social Security, fiscal responsibility isthe first and most important step. You've got to begin to reign inthe budget, pay as you go, to try to replenish our Social SecurityTrust Fund.And with all due respect, the last time we had a crisis in SocialSecurity was 1983. President Reagan and Speaker Tip O'Neill came upwith a commission. That was the best and smartest way, because you'vegot to get Republicans and Democrats together.That's what I will do. And I will say, number one, don't cutbenefits on current beneficiaries; they're already having a hardenough time. And number two, do not impose additional tax burdens onmiddle-class families.There are lots of ways we can fix Social Security that don't imposethose burdens, and I will do that.
But there are more progressive ways of doing itthan, you know, lifting the cap. And I think we'll work it out. Ihave every confidence we're going to work it out. I know that we canmake this happen.
Well, Charlie, on Friday, I was with Mayor Nutter,who's here, in West Philadelphia at the YMCA there, to talk about whatwe could do together to bring down the crime rate that has ravagedPhiladelphia.You know, more than one person, on average, a day is murdered inPhiladelphia. And Mayor Nutter is very committed, as the mayor ofthis great city, to try to do what he can to stem the violence.And what I said then is what I have been saying, that I will be agood partner, for cities like Philadelphia, as president. Because Iwill bring back the COPS program, the so-called COPS program, where wehad 100,000 police on the street, which really helped drive down thecrime rate and also helped create better community relations.I will also work to reinstate the assault weapons ban. We had itduring the 1990s. It really was an aid to our police officers, whoare now once again, because it has lapsed -- the Republicans will notreinstate it -- are being outgunned on our streets by these military-style weapons.I will also work to make sure that police departments inPhiladelphia, Pittsburgh, Harrisburg, across America get access to thefederal information that will enable them to track illegal guns,because the numbers are astounding. Probably 80 percent of the gunsused in gun crimes are in the hands of that criminal, that gang member-- unfortunately, people who are sometimes, you know, mentallychallenged -- because it got there illegally. And under theRepublicans, that information was kept from local law enforcement.So I believe that we can balance what I think is the rightequation. I respect the Second Amendment. I respect the rights oflawful gun owners to own guns, to use their guns, but I also believethat most lawful gun owners whom I have spoken with for many yearsacross our country also want to be sure that we keep those guns out ofthe wrong hands.And as president, I will work to try to bridge this divide, which Ithink has been polarizing and, frankly, doesn't reflect the commonsense of the American people.So we will strike the right balance to protect the constitutionalright but to give people the feeling and the reality that they will beprotected from guns in the wrong hands.
You know, George, I want to give local communitiesthe opportunity to have some authority over determining how to keeptheir citizens safe.This case you're referring to, before the Supreme Court, isapparently dividing the Bush administration. You know, the Bushadministration basically said, we don't have enough facts to knowwhether or not it is appropriate.And Vice President Cheney who, you know, is a fourth specialbranch of government all unto himself -- (laughter) -- has actuallyfiled a brief saying, oh, no, we have to, you know, we have to preventD.C. from doing this.So --
Well, what I support is sensible regulation thatis consistent with the constitutional right to own and bear arms.
Well, I think a total ban, with no exceptionsunder any circumstances, might be found by the court not to be. But Idon't know the facts.But I don't think that should blow open a hole that says thatD.C. or Philadelphia or anybody else cannot come up with sensibleregulations to protect their people and keep, you know, machine gunsand assault weapons out of the hands of folks who shouldn't have them.
What I favor is what works in New York. You know,we have a set of rules in New York City and we have a totallydifferent set of rules in the rest of the state. What might work inNew York City is certainly not going to work in Montana. So, for thefederal government to be having any kind of, you know, blanket rulesthat they're going to try to impose, I think doesn't make sense.
I was for -- I was for the New York rules, that'sright. I was for the New York rules because they have worked overtime. And there isn't a lot of uproar in New York about changing them,because I go to upstate New York, where we have a lot of hunters andpeople who are collectors and people who are sport shooters; they haveevery reason to believe that their rights are being respected. Youwalk down the street with a police officer in Manhattan; he wants tobe sure that there is some way of protecting him and protecting thepeople that are in his charge.
Well, here's the way I'd prefer to think about it.I think we've got to have affirmative action generally to try togive more opportunities to young people from disadvantaged backgrounds-- whoever they are. That's why I'm a strong supporter of earlychildhood education and universal pre-kindergarten.That's why I'm against No Child Left Behind as it is currentlyoperating. And I would end it, because we can do so much better tohave an education system that really focuses in on kids who need extrahelp.That's why I'm in favor of much more college aid, not theseoutrageous predatory student loan rates that are charging people I'vemet, across Pennsylvania, 20, 25, 28 percent interest rates. Let'smake college affordable again.See, I think we have to look at what we're trying to achieve heresomewhat differently. We do have a real gap. We have a gap inachievement. We have a gap in income. But we don't have a potentialgap.I think our job should be to try to create the conditions thatenable people to live up to their God-given potential. And that meanshealth care for everyone -- no exceptions, nobody left out. And itmeans taking a hard look at what we need to do to compete and win inthe global economy.So that's how I prefer to think about it. You know, let'saffirmatively invest in our young people and make it possible for themto have a good middle-class life in today's much more competitiveeconomy.
That's right.
Well, I met with a group of truckers in Harrisburgabout a week and a half ago, and here's what I told them. Number one,we are going to investigate these gas prices. The federal governmenthas certain tools that this administration will not use, in theFederal Trade Commission and other ways, through the JusticeDepartment, because I believe there is market manipulation going on,particularly among energy traders. We've seen this movie before, inEnron, and we've got to get to the bottom to make sure we're not beingtaken advantage of.Number two, I would quit putting oil into the Strategic PetroleumReserve and I would release some to help drive the price downglobally.And thirdly, if there is any kind of gas tax moratorium, as somepeople are now proposing --
-- like John McCain, and some Democrats, frankly-- I think Senator Menendez and others have said that we may have todo something, because when you get to $4-a-gallon gas, people are notgoing to be able to afford to drive to work. And what I would like tosee us do is to say if we have that, then we should have a windfallprofits tax on these outrageous profits of the oil companies, and putthat money back into the highway trust fund, so that we don't lose outon repair and construction and rebuilding.But ultimately, Charlie, we've got to have a long-term energystrategy. We are so much more dependent on foreign oil today than wewere on 9/11, and that is a real indictment of our leadership. AndI've laid out a comprehensive plan to move us toward energyindependence that I hope I will have the opportunity to implement aspresident.
I'm going to have to give some serious thought tothat. (Laughter.) You know, I do believe that it's a way to unifyour country. I thought that President Bush was right when he askedhis father and Bill to represent us during the aftermath of thetsunami. I thought it sent a great message here at home and aroundthe world. And I'm sure that there will be opportunities to ask allthe former presidents to work on behalf of our nation.You know, we've got to come together. And the former presidentsreally exemplify that, whether one agrees with them politically ornot. When they're all together, representing our country, that sendsa strong message. And I would look for a way to use all our formerpresidents, but that'll take some careful thought on my part.(Laughter.)
Well, I say to them what I've said to votersacross America -- that we need a fighter back in the White House. Weneed someone who's going to take on the special interests.And I have a plan to take away $55 billion of the giveaways andthe subsidies that the president and Congress have lavished on thedrug companies and the oil companies and the insurance companies andWall Street. And I have a plan to give that money back -- give itback in tax cuts to the middle class -- people who deserve it, whohave been struggling under this president, who feel invisible, whofeel like, you know, they're not even seen anymore.And we're going to make everybody feel like they're part of theAmerican family again. And we're going to tackle the problems thathave been waiting for a champion back in the White House.Now, obviously, I can't do this alone. I can only do it if I getpeople who believe in me and support me and who look at my trackrecord and know that, you know, I've spent a lifetime trying toempower people, trying to fight for them.And I think it's going to be challenging, but it is absolutely what wemust do in order to keep faith with our country and to give ourchildren the future that they deserve.So I will tell everyone who listens that I'm ready to be thecommander in chief. I've 35 generals and admirals, including twoformer chairmen of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, General Wesley Clark andothers, who believe that I am the person to lead us out of Iraq, totake on al Qaeda, to rebuild our military.And I will turn this economy around. We will get back to sharedprosperity and we will see once again that we can do this the rightway so it's not just a government of the few, by the few and for thefew. And I need your help. I need the help of the voters here inPennsylvania, first and foremost, in order to be able to get to thoseconversations.And I hope that I have demonstrated not just over the last weeksor even over the last hour and half but over a lifetime that you cancount on me. You know where I stand. You know that I will fight foryou and that together we're going to take back our country.

Thank you.  Thank you all very much.  Thank you.  Thank you.
I’m delighted to be here at this great university, one of the premier public institutions of higher education in our entire country.  Yes, indeed.  Just, you know, one of those statements of fact that deserves a response.
I want to thank my longtime friend, Vice President Mondale, for his kind words.  His support in this campaign means a great deal to me personally, because I admire so much his service to our country.  He is a great Minnesotan and a great American, and we’re so privileged to have him with us today.
I also want to acknowledge a few of the other elected officials who are here.  I am, of course absolutely delighted to be joined by former colleagues and friends, your senators, Amy Klobuchar and Al Franken, who are quite the dynamic duo for your state.  And I am grateful to them for everything they’re doing and for their help and support of my campaign.
I also want to thank Tina Smith, your lieutenant governor, and Steve Simon, your secretary of state.
And I understand that Betsy Hodges is here, Mayor of Minneapolis.
And I also want to acknowledge the dean of the Humphries School, Eric Schwartz.  Eric was my top advisor on refugee issues at the State Department.  I also had the great privilege of working with him when he was on the National Security Council during my husband’s administration.  You know, he brings a mix of expertise and empathy that has been conspicuously missing from much of our public debate.
And I am grateful he is here today, but I’m also a little jealous that all of you here at the university get to have the benefit of his experience.
You know, over the past several months, I have listened to the problems that keep American families up at night.  Now, most people don’t expect life to be easy, but they do want more security, a good-paying job that lets you afford a middle class lifestyle, health care you can count on, a little bit put away for your retirement.
Being secure also means being safe, safe at home, at school, at work.  And today, I want to talk about how we keep our country safe from a threat that’s on everyone’s minds, the threat of terrorism.
But I want to begin by saying, we cannot give in to fear.  We can’t let it stop us from doing what is right and necessary to make us safe, and doing it in way that is consistent with our values.
We cannot let fear push us into reckless actions that end up making us less safe.  Americans are going to have to act with both courage and clarity.
Now, as we all know, on December 2nd, two shooters killed 14 people at a holiday party in San Bernardino, California.
Sadly, in America in 2015, turning on the news and hearing about a mass shooting is not unusual.  But this one turned out to be different, because these killers were a husband and wife inspired by ISIS.
Americans have experienced terrorism before.  On 9/11, we learned that terrorists in Afghanistan could strike our homeland.  From Fort Hood to Chattanooga to the Boston Marathon, we saw people radicalized here carrying out deadly attacks.
But San Bernardino felt different.  Maybe it was the timing, coming so soon after Paris.  Maybe it was how random it seemed, a terrorist attack in a suburban office park, not a high-profile target or symbol of American power.  It made us all feel it could have been anywhere, at any time.
The phrase “active shooter” should not be one we have to teach our children.  But it is.
And now we are all grappling with what all this means for our future, for our safety, our sense of well-being, and our trust and connections with our neighbors.  We want to be open-hearted, and we want to celebrate America’s diversity, not fear it.
And while we know the overwhelming majority of people here and around the world hate ISIS and love peace, we do have to be prepared for more terrorists plotting attacks.
Just yesterday, a man in Maryland was charged with receiving thousands of dollars from ISIS for use in planning an attack.  And here in Minnesota, authorities have charged ten men with conspiring to provide material support to ISIS.
But in the Twin Cities, you have also seen firsthand how communities come together to resist radicalization:  local imams condemning terrorist violence, local artists and activists pushing back against terrorist propaganda.
I just met with a group of community leaders who told me about some of the work and the challenges that they are dealing with.
As the first Somali-American police sergeant in Minnesota, and probably in the country, said recently, “Safety is a shared responsibility, so we have to work together.”
The threat we face is daunting.  But America has overcome big challenges many times before.  Throughout our history, we’ve stared into the face of evil and refused to blink.  We beat Fascism, won the Cold War, brought Osama bin Laden to justice.
So no one should ever underestimate the determination of the American people.  And I am confident we will once again choose resolve over fear.  And we will defeat these new enemies, just as we’ve defeated those who’ve threatened us in the past.
Because it is not enough to contain ISIS, we must defeat ISIS, break its momentum and then its back.  And not just ISIS, but the broader radical jihadist movement that also includes al Qaeda and offshoots like al Shabaab in Somalia.
Now, waging and winning this fight will require serious leadership.  But unfortunately, our political debate has been anything but serious.
We can’t afford another major ground war in the Middle East.  That’s exactly what ISIS wants from us.  Shallow slogans don’t add up to a strategy.  Promising to carpet bomb until the desert glows doesn’t make you sound strong, it makes you sound like you’re in over your head.  Bluster and bigotry are not credentials for becoming Commander-in-Chief.
And it is hard to take seriously senators who talk tough but then hold up key national security nominations, including the top official at the Treasury Department responsible for disrupting terrorist financing.
Every day that’s wasted on partisan gridlock could put Americans in danger.  So, yes, we need a serious discussion.  And that’s why in a speech last month before the Council on Foreign Relations I laid out a three-part plan to defeat ISIS and the broader extremist movement.
One, defeat ISIS in the Middle East by smashing its stronghold, hitting its fighters, leaders, and infrastructure from the air, and intensifying support for local forces who can pursue them on the ground.
Second, defeat them around the world by dismantling the global network of terror that supplies radical jihadists with money, arms, propaganda, and fighters.
And third, defeat them here at home by foiling plots, disrupting radicalization, and hardening our defenses.
Now, these three lines of effort reinforce one another.  So we need to pursue all of them at once, using every pillar of American power.
It will require skillful diplomacy to continue Secretary Kerry’s efforts to encourage political reconciliation in Iraq and political transition in Syria, enabling more Sunni Arabs and Kurdish fighters to take on ISIS on both sides of the border, and to get our Arab and Turkish partners to actually step up and do their part.
It will require more U.S. and allied airpower, and a broader target set for strikes by planes and drones, with proper safeguards.
It will require Special Operations units to advise and train local forces and conduct key counterterrorism missions.
What it will not require is tens of thousands of American combat troops.  That is not the right action for us to take in this situation.
So there is a lot to do, and today, I want to focus on the third part of my plan, how we defend our country and prevent radicalization here at home.
We need a comprehensive strategy to counter each step in the process that can lead to an attack like the one in San Bernardino.
First, we have to shut down ISIS recruitment in the United States, especially online.
Second, stop would-be jihadists from getting training overseas, and stop foreign terrorists from coming here.
Third, discover and disrupt plots before they can be carried out.
Fourth, support law enforcement officers who risk their lives to prevent and respond to attacks.
And fifth, empower our Muslim-American communities, who are on the front-lines of the fight against radicalization.
This is a 360-degree strategy to keep America safe, and I want to walk through each of the elements, from recruitment to training to planning to execution.
First, shutting down recruitment.  We have to stop jihadists from radicalizing new recruits in-person and through social media, chat rooms, and what’s called the “Dark Web.”
To do that, we need stronger relationships between Washington, Silicon Valley, and all of our great tech companies and entrepreneurs.  American innovation is a powerful force, and we have to put it to work defeating ISIS.
That starts with understanding where and how recruitment happens.  Our security professionals need to more effectively track and analyze ISIS’s social media posts and map jihadist networks, and they need help from the tech community.
Companies should redouble their efforts to maintain and enforce their own service agreements and other necessary policies to police their networks, identifying extremist content and removing it.
Now, many are already doing this, and sharing those best practices more widely is important.
At the State Department, I started an interagency center to combat violent jihadist messages, to have a better way to communicate on behalf of our values, and to give young people drawn to those messages an alternative narrative.
We recruited specialists fluent in Arabic, Urdu, and Somali to wage online battles with extremists to counter their propaganda.
Now, those efforts have not kept pace with the threat, so we need to step up our game, in partnership with the private sector and credible moderate voices outside government.
But that’s just some of what we have to do.  Experts from the FBI, the intelligence community, Homeland Security, DOD, the State Department, and the technology industry should work together to develop a unified national strategy to defeat ISIS in cyberspace, using all of our capabilities to deny jihadists virtual territory, just as we work to deny them actual territory.
And at the same time, we also have to do more to address the challenge of radicalization, whatever form it takes.
It’s imperative that the Saudis, the Qataris, the Kuwaitis and others stop their citizens from supporting radical schools, madrassas and mosques around the world, once and for all, and that should be the top priority in all of our discussions with these countries.
Now, second, we have to prevent ISIS recruits from training abroad, and prevent foreign jihadists from coming here.
Most urgent is stemming the flow of fighters from Europe and America to Iraq and Syria, and then back home again.
The United States and our allies need to know the identities of every fighter who makes that trip, and then share information with each other in real time.
Right now, European nations don’t always alert each other when they turn away a suspected extremist at the border or when a passport is stolen.  They have to dramatically improve intelligence sharing and counterterrorism cooperation.  And we’re ready to help them do that.
We also need to take down the network of enablers who help jihadists finance and facilitate their travel, forge documents, and evade detection.  And the United States and our allies should commit to revoke the passports and visas of jihadists who have gone to join ISIS or other groups, and bring the full force of law against them.
As I’ve said before, the United States has to take a close look at our visa programs.  And I am glad the administration and Congress are stepping up scrutiny in the wake of San Bernardino.  And that should include scrutinizing applicants’ social media postings.  We also should dispatch more Homeland Security agents to high-risk countries to better investigate visa applicants.
For many years, America has waived visa requirements for travelers from countries with reliable security procedures, including key allies in Europe and Asia.  That makes sense.  But we also have to be smart.  Except for limited exceptions like diplomats and aid workers, anyone who has traveled in the past five years to a country facing serious problems with terrorism and foreign fighters should have to go through a full visa investigation, no matter where they’re from.
We also have to be vigilant in screening and vetting refugees from Syria, guided by the best judgment of our security and diplomatic professionals.  Rigorous vetting already takes place while these refugees are still overseas, and it’s a process that historically takes 18 to 24 months.
But Congress needs to provide enough resources to ensure we have sufficient personnel deployed to run the most thorough possible process.
And just as important, we cannot allow terrorists to intimidate us into abandoning our values and our humanitarian obligations.
Turning away orphans, applying a religious test that discriminates against Muslims, slamming the door on every single Syrian refugee; that is not who we are.  We are better than that.
It would be a cruel irony indeed if ISIS can force families from their homes and then also prevent them from finding new ones.  So after rigorous screening, we should welcome families fleeing Syria just as the Twin Cities and this state have welcomed previous generations of refugees, exiles, and immigrants.
Of course, the key is to prevent terrorists also from exploiting our compassion and endangering our security.  But we can do this.  And I think we must.
Third, we have to discover and disrupt jihadist plots before they can be carried out.  This is going to take better intelligence collection, analysis, and sharing.  I’ve proposed an “intelligence surge” against ISIS that includes more operations officers and linguists, enhancing our technical surveillance of overseas targets, intercepting terrorist communications, flying more reconnaissance missions to track terrorists’ movements, and developing even closer partnerships with other intelligence services.
President Obama recently signed the USA Freedom Act, which was passed by a bipartisan majority in Congress.  It protects civil liberties while maintaining capabilities that our intelligence and law enforcement agencies need to keep us safe.  However, the new law is now under attack from presidential candidates on the left and right.  Some would strip away crucial counterterrorism tools, even with appropriate judicial and congressional oversight.  Others seem eager to go back to discredited practices of the past.
I don’t think we can afford to let either view prevail.  Now, encryption of mobile devices and communications does present a particularly tough problem with important implications for security and civil liberties.  Law enforcement and counterterrorism professionals warn that impenetrable encryption may make it harder for them to investigate plots and prevent future attacks.  On the other hand, there are very legitimate worries about privacy, network security, and creating new vulnerabilities that bad actors can exploit.
I know there’s no magic fix to this dilemma that will satisfy all these concerns.  But we can’t just throw up our hands.  The tech community and the government have to stop seeing each other as adversaries and start working together to keep us safe from terrorists.   And even as we make sure law enforcement officials get the tools they need to prevent attacks, it’s essential that we also make sure jihadists don’t get the tools they need to carry out attacks.
It defies common sense that Republicans in Congress refuse to make it harder for potential terrorists to buy guns.  If you’re too dangerous to fly, you’re too dangerous to buy a gun, period.   And we should insist on comprehensive background checks and close loopholes that allow potential terrorists to buy weapons online or at gun shows.  And I think it’s time to restore the ban on assault weapons and high capacity magazines.
I know this will drive some of our Republican friends a little crazy.  You’ll probably hear it tonight.  They will say that guns are a totally separate issue, nothing to do with terrorism.  Well, I have news for them, terrorists use guns to kill Americans.  And I think we should make it a lot harder for them from to do that ever again.
And there’s a question, a question they should be asked:  Why don’t the Republican candidates want to do that?   You see, I have this old fashioned idea that we elect a President in part, in large part, to keep us safe, from terrorists, from gun violence, from whatever threatens our families and communities.  And I’m not going to let the gun lobby or anyone else tell me that’s not the right path for us to go down.
Now, the fourth element in my strategy is supporting law enforcement officers who risk their lives to prevent and respond to terrorist attacks.
In San Bernardino, city, county, state, and federal authorities acted with speed and courage to prevent even more loss of life.  Like Detective Jorge Lozano, a 15-year police veteran, who assured terrified civilians, “I’ll take a bullet before you do.”  There is no limit to the gratitude we owe to law enforcement professionals like that Detective Lozano who run toward danger to try to save lives.  And not just in the immediate wake of an attack.  Our police, firefighters, and emergency responders will keep putting their lives on the line long after the cameras move on.
It’s disgraceful that Congress has thus far failed to keep faith with first responders suffering from the lasting health effects of 9/11.  Many of them were men and women I was so proud to represent as a Senator from New York.  The Zadroga 9/11 Health Act never should have been allowed to lapse.  It looks like Majority Leader Mitch McConnell may have finally dropped his opposition.  And I hope the American people will hold him to that.  And we will continue to honor the service and sacrifice of those who responded to the worst terrorist attack in our history.
We have to make sure that local law enforcement has the resources and training they need to keep us safe.  And they should be more closely synced up with national counterterrorism experts, including with better use of “fusion centers” that serve as clearinghouses for intelligence and coordination.
And we need to strengthen our defenses and our resilience wherever we’re vulnerable, whether it’s “soft targets” like shopping malls or higher-profile targets like airports, railways, or power plants.  We have to build on the progress of the Obama Administration in locking down loose nuclear materials, and other WMD, so they never fall into the hands of terrorists who seek them actively around the world.
So we should be providing the Department of Homeland Security with the resources it needs to stay one step ahead, not trying to privatize key functions, like TSA, as some Republicans have proposed.
And it’s important for us to recognize that when we talk about law enforcement, we have made progress in being sure that our federal authorities share information with our state and local authorities, but that was an issue I tackled after 9/11, and we have to stay really vigilant so that information is in the hands where it needs to be.
Finally, the fifth element in the strategy is empowering Muslim-American communities who are on the front-lines of the fight against radicalization.  There are millions of peace-loving Muslims living, working, raising families, and paying taxes in our country.  These Americans may be our first, last, and best defense against home grown radicalization and terrorism.  They are the most likely to recognize the insidious effects of radicalization before it’s too late, intervene to help set a young person straight.  They are the best positioned to block anything going forward.
That’s why law enforcement has worked so hard since 9/11 to build up trust and strong relationships within Muslim-American communities.  Here in the Twin Cities, you have an innovative partnership that brings together parents, teachers, imams, and others in the Somali-American community with law enforcement, non-profits, local businesses, mental health professionals and others to intervene with young people who are at risk.
It’s called the Building Community Resilience Pilot Program, and it deserves increased support.  It has not gotten the financial resources that it needs to do everything the people involved in it know they can do.  And we’ve got to do a better job of supporting it.
Now I know that like many places across the country, there’s more work to do to increase trust between communities and law enforcement.  Just last month, I know here a young African American man was fatally shot by a police officer.  And I understand an investigation is underway.  Whatever the outcome, tragedies like this raise hard questions about racial justice in America and put at risk efforts to build the community relationships that help keep us safe from crime and from terrorism.
When people see that respect and trust are two-way streets, they’re more likely to work hand-in-hand with law enforcement.  One of the mothers of the 10 men recently charged with conspiring with terrorists said, “We have to stop the denial,” she told other parents that.  “We have to talk to our kids and work with the FBI.”  That’s a message we need to hear from leaders within Muslim-American communities across our country.
But we also want to highlight the successes in Muslim American communities, and there are so many of them.  I just met with the first Somali-American council member of the City Council here.  And he was proudly telling me how much change Somali immigrants, now Muslim-Americans have made in parts of the city and neighborhoods that had been pretty much hollowed out.  Let’s look at the successes.
If we’re going to full integrate everyone into America, then we need to be seeing all their contributions, too.  And that is one of the many reasons why we must all stand up against offensive, inflammatory, hateful, anti-Muslim rhetoric.  You know, not only do these comments cut against everything we stand for as Americans, they are also dangerous.
As the Director of the FBI told Congress recently, anything that erodes trust with Muslim-Americans makes the job of law enforcement more difficult.  We need every community invested in this fight, not alienated and sitting on the sidelines.
One of the community leaders I met with told me that a lot of the children in the community are now afraid to go to school.  They’re not only afraid of being perceived as a threat, they are afraid of being threatened because of who they are.  This is such a open-hearted and generous community, I hope there will be even more efforts perhaps under the aegis of the university and certainly Governor Dayton and others, to bring people together to reassure members of the community, particularly children and teenagers that they are welcome, invited and valued here in this city and state.
Now Donald Trump’s proposal to ban all Muslims from entering the United States has rightly sparked outrage across our country and around the world.  Even some of the other Republican candidates are saying he’s gone too far.  But the truth is, many of those same candidates have also said disgraceful things about Muslims.  And this kind of divisive rhetoric actually plays into the hands of terrorists.  It alienates partners and undermines moderates we need around the world in the fight against ISIS.
You know, you hear a lot of talk from some of the other candidates about coalitions.  Everyone seems to want one.  But there’s not nearly as much talk about what it actually takes to build a coalition and make it work.  I know how hard this is because I’ve done it.  And I can tell you, insulting potential allies doesn’t make it any easier.
And demonizing Muslims also feeds a narrative that jihadists use to recruit new followers around the world, that the United States is at war with Islam.  As both the Pentagon and the FBI have said in the past week, we cannot in any way lend credence to that twisted idea.  This is not a clash of civilizations.  It’s a clash between civilization and barbarism and that’s how it must be seen and fought.
Some will tell you that our open society is a vulnerability in the struggle against terrorism.  I disagree.  I believe our tolerance and diversity are at the core of our strength.  At a Naturalization ceremony for new citizens today in Washington, President Obama noted the tension throughout our history between welcoming or rejecting the stranger.  It is, he said, about the meaning of America, what kind of country do we want to be?  And it’s about the capacity of each generation to honor the creed as old as our founding, E Pluribus Unum.  Out of many we are one.
President Obama is right, and it matters.  It’s no coincidence that American Muslims have long been better integrated and less susceptible to radicalization than Muslims in less welcoming countries.  We can’t give in to demagogues who play on our basest instincts.  We must instead rely on the principles written into our American DNA.  Freedom.  Equality.  Opportunity.
America is strongest when all our people believe they have a stake in our country and our future, no matter where they’re from, what they look like, how they worship, or who they love.  Our country was founded by people fleeing religious persecution.  As George Washington put it, the United States gives “to bigotry no sanction, to persecution no assistance.”  So to all our Muslim-American brothers and sisters, this is your country too.  And I am proud to be your fellow American.
And I want to remind us, particularly our Republican friends, that George W. Bush was right.  Six days after 9/11 he went to a Muslim community center and here’s what he said, those who feel like they can intimidate our fellow citizens to take their anger don’t represent the best of America, they represent the worst of human kind, and they should be ashamed of that kind of behavior.
So if you want to see the best of America, you need look no further than Army Captain Humayun Khan.  He was born in the United Arab Emirates.  He moved to Maryland as a small child, and later graduated from the University of Virginia, before enlisting in the U.S. Army.
In June 2004, he was serving in Iraq.  One day, while his infantry unit was guarding the gates of their base, a suspicious vehicle appeared.  Captain Khan told his troops to get back, but he went forward.  He took ten steps toward the car before it exploded.  Captain Khan was killed, but his unit was saved by his courageous acts.  Captain Khan was posthumously awarded the Bronze Star and Purple Heart.  He was just 27 years old.
“We still wonder what made him take those 10 steps,” Khan’s father said in a recent interview.
“Maybe that’s the point,” he went on, “where all the values, all the service to country, all the things he learned in this country kicked in.  It was those values that made him take those 10 steps.  Those 10 steps told us we did not make a mistake in moving to this country,” his father finished.
As hard as this is, it’s time to move from fear to resolve.  It’s time to stand up and say,
“We are Americans.”  We are the greatest nation on earth not in spite of the challenges we’ve faced, but because of them.  Americans will not buckle or break.  We will not turn on each other or turn on our principles.  We will pursue our enemies with unyielding power and purpose.  We will crush their would-be caliphate and counter radical jihadism wherever it takes root.  We’re in it for the long haul.  And we’ll stand taller and stronger than they can possibly imagine.
That’s what we do here.  It’s who we are.  That’s how we’ll win, by looking at one another with respect, with concern, with commitment.  That’s the America that I know makes us all so proud to be a part of.
Thank you all very much.

Thank you so much South Carolina! Thank you so much, from one end of this state to another, I am so greatly appreciative, because today you sent a message: in America, when we stand together, there is no barrier too big to break.
We’ve now gone through four early states, and I want to congratulate Senator Sanders on running a great race. And tomorrow, this campaign goes national.
We are going to compete for every vote in every state. We are not taking anything, and we’re not taking anyone for granted.
I want to thank all the local leaders, legislators, mayors, pastors, organizers, volunteers who have worked their hearts out for this campaign. I thank all of our great South Carolina friends going back so many years. I especially want to thank two of your former great Democratic governors, Dick Riley and Jim Hodges. And I especially want to thank your champion—your statesman—in Congress, Jim Clyburn. I am so looking forward to working with the congressman to make the changes and continue the progress that we can build on the record and accomplishments of President Obama.
And to the almost 850,000 people who have contributed what they could, most giving less than $100, I thank each and every one of you. Now, every day since Iowa, more and more of you have stepped up. Today, grassroots donors are powering this campaign.
And to the millions of people watching across our country, please join us by making a donation to hillaryclinton.com. And here’s why: because together, we can break down all the barriers holding our families and our country back; we can build ladders of opportunity and empowerment so every single American can have that chance to live up to his or her God-given potential. And then, and only then, can America live up to its full potential, too.
This campaign, and this victory tonight, is for the parents and teachers in rural South Carolina. They showed me crumbling classrooms and communities too long neglected. We’re going to work together to give our children the education they need and deserve here in South Carolina and across America.
This campaign and our victory is for the entrepreneur who told me more dreams die in the parking lots of banks than anywhere else. And that’s especially true for women and people of color. So we’re going to work together to give people—particularly young people—the tools you need to start that small business you’ve been dreaming of.
And this campaign and our victory is for the reverend—a presiding elder of the AME Church—who looked at all the violence and division in our country and asked me the other night, ‘How? How are we ever going to strengthen the bonds of family and community again?’
Well, we’re going to start by working together with more love and kindness in our hearts and more respect for each other, even when we disagree.
Despite what you hear, we don’t need to make America great again: America has never stopped being great. But we do need to make America whole again. Instead of building walls, we need to be tearing down barriers. We need to show by everything we do that we really are in this together.
Today, too many people at the top, too many corporations have forgotten this basic truth about what makes America great. Prescription drug companies that increase the price of drugs for no reason [other] than greed and then double and triple bills to folks overnight; corporations that use shell games to shift their headquarters overseas for no other reason than to avoid paying their fair share of taxes; companies like Johnson Controls, an auto parts company in Wisconsin, that we taxpayers helped to save with the auto rescue in 2008.
Now, let there be no doubt in any board room or executive suite across this country: if you cheat your employees, exploit your customers, pollute our environment, or rip off the taxpayers, we will hold you accountable. If you turn your back on America, you’ll pay a price. But, if you do the right thing, if you invest in your workers and in your country’s future, then we will stand with you.
Now, together, we have to break down all the barriers. Not just some. It’s important that Wall Street never threaten Main Street again. No bank can be too big to fail and no executive too powerful to jail.
But, America isn’t a single issue country, my friends. We need more than a plan for the biggest banks. The middle class needs a raise! And we need more good jobs! Jobs that pay well and can’t be outsourced. Jobs that provide dignity and a path to a brighter future. And we can create those good jobs by building on the progress we’ve made under President Obama. So let’s make new investments in manufacturing and small business, in scientific research, in clean energy, enough clean energy to power every home in America. And, don’t let anybody tell you we can’t make things in America: I know we can, and I know we will.
Let’s break down the barriers that keep people on the sidelines of our economy; especially women. Don’t you think we’ve waited long enough for quality affordable child care and paid family leave? Don’t you think it’s time for equal pay for equal work?
And let’s break down the barriers that stop our children from getting the best possible start in life. We need to support great teachers and great schools in every zip code.
Let’s break down the barriers holding back our young people, especially the student debt that makes it hard to imagine ever living the life you want.
And we are going to give special support to our historically black colleges and universities, which play a vital role in this state and across our country.
Now, breaking down all the barriers means we also have to face the reality of systemic racism that more than a half a century after Rosa Parks sat, and Dr. King marched, and John Lewis bled, still plays a significant role in determining who gets ahead in America and who gets left behind. We have to invest in communities of color. Reform our broken criminal justice and immigration system. We have to guarantee opportunity, dignity, and justice for every American.
And tonight I want to pay tribute to five extraordinary women who criss-crossed this state with me and for me. Five mothers, brought together by tragedy.
Sabrina Fulton, mother of Trayvon Martin, shot and killed in Florida just for walking down the street.
Lucy Mcbath, mother of Jordan Davis, shot and killed by someone who thought he was playing his music too loud in his car.
Maria Hamilton, mother of Dontre, shot and killed by police in Milwaukee.
Gwen Carr, mother of Eric Garner, choked to death after being stopped for selling loose cigarettes on the street.
And Geneva Reed-Veal, mother of Sandra Bland, who died in police custody in Texas.
They all lost children, which is almost unimaginable. Yet they have not been broken or embittered. Instead, they have channeled their sorrow into a strategy and their mourning into a movement. And they are reminding us of something deep and powerful in the American spirit.
By now, we all know the story of Flint, Michigan. How a city’s children were poisoned by toxic water because their governor wanted to save a little money. But there’s another side to the story in Flint. It’s a story of a community that’s been knocked down but refused to be knocked out. It’s hundreds of union plumbers coming from across the country to help install new water fixtures. It’s students raising funds for water deliveries and showing up in Flint to distribute supplies. It’s the United Auto Workers and General Motors donating millions of dollars.
We know there are many other Flints out there. Communities that have been left out and left behind. But for every problem we face anywhere in America, someone somewhere is working to solve it. Our country was built by people who had each other’s backs; who understood we all have to do our part, and that at our best we all rise together.
Imagine what we can all build together, when each and every American has the chance to live up to his or her potential.
Imagine a tomorrow where no child grows up in the shadow of discrimination or under the specter of deportation.
Imagine a tomorrow where every parent can find a good job, and every grandparent can enjoy a secure retirement.
Imagine a tomorrow where hard work is honored, where families are supported, and where communities are strong; when we trust and respect each other despite all that divides us.
So, please. Join us in this campaign for our country’s future. Go to hillaryclinton.com, or text JOIN to 47246, right now.
You know, on one of my first trips to South Carolina during this campaign, I stopped by a bakery here in Columbia. I was saying hello everybody; I went over to say hello to a man reading a book in the corner. Turned out he was a minister. And the book was a Bible. He was studying I Corinthians 13, which happens to be one of my favorite passages. “Love never fails,” it tells us. “Love bears all things, believes all things, hopes all things, endures all things.”
These are words to live by not only for ourselves but also for our country. I know it sometimes seems a little odd for someone running for president, these days, in this time, to say we need more loving kindness in America. But I’m telling you, from the bottom up my heart, we do. We do.
We have so much to look forward to. There is no doubt in my mind that America’s best years can be ahead of us. We have got to believe that! We’ve got to work for that! We have to stand with each other, we have to hold each other up, lift each other up! Move together into the future that we will make! Thank you!

Thank you. Thank you so much. Thank you very much, President Van Zant, and thanks to everyone at the New School for welcoming us today. I’m delighted to be back.
You know, over the past few months, I have had the opportunity to listen to Americans’ concerns about an economy that still isn’t delivering for them. It’s not delivering the way that it should. It still seems, to most Americans that I have spoken with, that it is stacked for those at the top.
But I’ve also heard about the hopes that people have for their future — going to college without drowning in debt; starting that small business they’ve always dreamed about; getting a job that pays well enough to support a family and provide for a secure retirement.
Previous generations of Americans built the greatest economy and strongest middle class the world has ever known on the promise of a basic bargain: if you work hard and do your part, you should be able to get ahead. And when you get ahead, America gets ahead. But over the past several decades, that bargain has eroded. Our job is to make it strong again.
For 35 years, Republicans have argued that if we give more wealth to those at top by cutting their taxes and letting big corporations write their own rules, it will trickle down, it will trickle down to everyone else. Yet every time they have a chance to try that approach, it explodes the national debt, concentrates wealth even more and does practically nothing to help hard-working Americans.
Twice now in the past 20 years, a Democratic president has had to come in and clean up the mess left behind.
I think the results speak for themselves. Under President Clinton — I like the sound of that — America saw the longest peacetime expansion in our history.
Nearly 23 million jobs, a balanced budget and a surplus for the future, and most importantly, incomes rose across the board, not just for those already at the top. Eight years later, President Obama and the American people’s hard work pulled us back from the brink of depression. President Obama saved the auto industry, imposed new rules on Wall Street and provided health care to 16 million Americans.
Now today — today, as the shadow of crisis recedes and longer- term challenges come into focus, I believe we have to build a growth and fairness economy. You can’t have one without the other. We can’t create enough jobs and new businesses without more growth, and we can’t build strong families and support our consumer economy without more fairness. We need both.
Because while America standing again, we are not yet running the way we should. Corporate profits are at near record highs and Americans are working as hard as ever. But paychecks had nearly budged in real terms. Families today are stretched in so many directions, and so are their budgets. Out of pocket costs of health care, child care, hearing for aging parents, are rising a lot faster than wages.
I hear this everywhere I go. A single mom talked about juggling a job and classes at community college while raising three kids. She doesn’t expect anything to come easy. But if she got a raise, everything would not be quite so hard.
The grandmother who works around the clock providing child care to other people’s kids. She’s proud of her work, but the pay is fairly enough to live on, especially with the soaring price of her prescription drugs.
The young entrepreneur whose dream of buying a bowling alley where he worked as a teenager was nearly derailed by his student debt. If he can grow his business, he can pay off his debt and pay his employees, including himself, more, too.
Millions of hardworking Americans tell similar stories. Wages need to rise to keep up with cost, paychecks need to grow. Families who work hard and do their part deserve to get ahead and stay ahead. The defining economic challenge of our time clear. We must raise incomes for hard-working Americans, so they can afford a middle-class life. We must drive steady income growth that lifts up families, and lifts up our country. And that…
And that will be my mission, from the first day I am president to the last. I…
I will get up every day thinking about the families of America, like the family I came from, with a hard-working dad who started a small business and scrimped, and saved, and gave us a good middle- class life. I will be thinking about all the people that I represented in New York and the stories that they told me, and that I worked with them to improve. I will, as your president take on this challenge against the backdrop of major changes in our economy and the global economy that did not start with the Recession and will not end with the recovery.
You know, advances in technology and expanding global trade have created new areas of commercial activity and opened new markets for our exports. Too often they are polarizing our economy, benefiting high skilled workers, but displacing and downgrading blue-collar jobs and other mid-level jobs that used to provide solid incomes for millions of Americans.
Today’s marketplace focuses too much on the short-term, like second to second financial trading, and quarterly earnings reports, and too little on long-term investments. Meanwhile, many Americans are making extra money renting out a small room, designing websites, selling products they design themselves at home, or even driving their own car. This on-demand, or so-called gig economy is creating exciting economies and unleashing innovation.
But it is also raising hard questions about work-place protections and what a good job will look like in the future.
So, all of these trends are real and none, none is going away. But they do not determine our destiny. The choices we make as a nation matter. And the choices we make in the years ahead will set the stage for what American life in the middle class and our economy will be like in this century.
As president, I will work with every possible partner to turn the tide to make these currents of change start working for us more than against us, to strengthen, not hollow out, the American middle class. Because I think at our best, that’s what Americans do. We are problem solvers, not deniers. We don’t hide from change; we harness it.
The measure of our success must be how much incomes rise for hardworking families, not just for successful CEOs and money managers and not some just arbitrary growth targets untethered to people’s lives and livelihoods.
I want to see our economy work for the struggling, the striving and the successful. We’re not going to find all the answers we need today in the playbooks of the past, we can’t go back to the old policies that failed us before, nor can we just replay the successes.
Today is not 1993. It’s not 2009. So we need solutions for the big challenges we face now.
So today, I’m proposing an agenda to raise incomes for hardworking Americans, an agenda for strong growth, fair growth and long-term growth.
Let me begin with strong growth. More growth means more jobs and more new businesses. More jobs give people choices about where to work.
And employers have to offer higher wages and better benefits in order to compete with each other to hire new workers and keep the productive ones. That’s why economists tell us that getting closer to full employment is crucial for raising incomes.
Small businesses create more than 60 percent of new American jobs on net, so they have to be a top priority. I’ve said I want to be the small-business president, and I mean it. And throughout this campaign, I’m going to be talking about how we empower entrepreneurs with less red tape, easier access to capital, tax relief and simplification.
I’ll also push for broader business tax reform to spur investment in America, closing those loopholes that reward companies for sending jobs and profits overseas.
And I know it’s not always how we think about this, but another engine of strong growth should be comprehensive immigration reform.
I want you to hear this. Bringing millions of hardworking people into the formal economy would increase our gross domestic product by an estimated $700 billion over 10 years.
Then there are the new public investments that will help establish businesses and entrepreneurs, create the next generation of high-paying jobs.
You know, when we get Americans moving, we get our country moving. So let’s establish an infrastructure bank that can channel more public and private funds…
… channel those funds to finance world-class airports, railways, roads, bridges and ports.
And let’s built those faster broadband networks and make sure there’s a greater diversity of providers so consumers have more choice.
And really, there’s no excuse not to make greater investments in cleaner renewable energy right now.
Our economy obviously runs on energy, and the time has come to make America the clean-energy superpower. I advocate that because these investments will create millions of jobs, save us money in the long run and help us meet the threats of climate change.
And let’s fund the scientific and medical research that spawns innovative companies and creates entire new industries, just as the project to sequence the human genome did in the 1990s and President Obama’s initiatives on precision medicine and brain research will do in the coming years.
I will set ambitious goals in all of these areas in the months ahead.
But today, let me emphasize another key ingredient of strong growth that often goes overlooked and undervalued: breaking down barriers so more Americans participate more fully in the workforce, especially women.
We are in a global competition, as I’m sure you have noticed. And we cant afford to leave talent on the sidelines. But that’s exactly what we’re doing today. When we leave people out or write them off, we not only shortchange them and their dreams, we shortchange our country and our future.
The movement of women into the American workforce over the past 40 years was responsible for more than $3.5 trillion in economic growth. But that progress has stalled.
The United States used to rank 7th out of 24 advanced countries in women’s labor force participation. By 2013, we had dropped to 19th. That represents a lot of unused potential for our economy and for American families.
Studies show that nearly a third of this decline relative to other countries is because they’re expanding family-friendly policies like paid leave and we are not.
We should be making it easier for Americans to be both good workers and good parents and caregivers. Women who want to work should be able to do so without worrying every day about how they’re going to take care of their children or what will happen if a family member gets sick.
You know, last year –
– last year while I was at the hospital here in Manhattan, waiting for little Charlotte to make her grand entrance, one of the nurses said, thank you for fighting for paid leave. And we began to talk about it. She sees firsthand what it means for herself and her colleagues as well as for the working parents that she helps take care of.
It’s time to recognize that quality, affordable childcare is not a luxury. It’s a growth strategy. And it’s way past time to end the outrage of so many women still earning less than men on the job and women of color making even less.
You know, all this lost money adds up. And for some women, it’s thousands of dollars every year. Now I am well aware that for far too long these challenges have been dismissed by some as women’s issues. Well, those days are over.
Fair pay and fair scheduling, paid family leave and earned sick days, childcare are essential to our competitiveness and our growth. And we can do this in a way that doesn’t impose unfair burdens on businesses, especially small businesses. As president, I’ll fight to put families first, just like I have my entire career.
Now beyond strong growth, we also need fair growth and that will be the second key driver of raising incomes. The evidence is in. Inequality is a drag on our entire economy. So this is the problem we need to tackle. Now, you may have heard Governor Bush say Americans just need to work longer hours. Well, he must not have met very many American workers.
Let him tell that to the nurse who stands on her feet all day, or the teacher who in that classroom or the trucker who drives all night. Let him tell that to the fast worker marching in the streets for better pay. They do not need a lecture. They need a raise.
The truth is the current rules for our economy do reward some work, like financial trading, for example much more than other work, like actually building and selling things, the work that has always been the backbone of our economy. To get all incomes rising again, we need to strike a better balance. If you work hard, you ought to be a fairly. So, we do have to raise the minimum wage, and implement President Obama’s new rules on overtime, and then we have to go further.
I will crack down on bosses who exploit employees by mis- classifying them as contractors or even steal their wages. To make paychecks stretch, we need to take on the major strains on family budgets. I will protect the Affordable Care Act and build on it to lower out-of-pocket health care costs.
And to make prescription drugs more affordable. We will help families look forward to retirement by defending and enhancing Social Security and making it easier to save for the future. Now, many of these proposals are time-tested and more than a little battle scarred. We need new ideas, as well, and one I believe in and will fight for is profit-sharing. Hard-working Americans deserve to benefit from the record corporate earnings they help produce.
So, I will produce ways to encourage companies to share profits with their employees. That is good for workers and good businesses. Studies show that profit sharing that gives everyone a stake in the company’s success can boost productivity and put money directly into employees’ pockets. It’s a win-win. Later this week in New Hampshire, I will have more to say about how we do this.
Another priority must be reforming our tax code. Now, we hear Republican candidates talk a lot about tax reform. But take a good look at their plans. Senator Rubio’s would cut taxes for households making around $3 million a year by almost $240,000, which is way more than three times the earnings of a typical family.
Well, that is a sure budget busting giveaway to the super wealthy, and that’s the kind of bad economics you are likely to hear from any of the candidates on the other side. I have a different take…
… guided license principles. First, hard-working families need and deserve tax relief and simplification. Second, those at the top have to pay their fair share. That’s why I support the Buffet Rule, which makes sure millionaires do not pay lower rates than their secretaries. I have called for closing the carried interest loophole, that lets wealthy financiers pay an artificially low rate.
And let’s agree that hugely successful companies that benefit from everything that America has to offer, should not be able to game the system and avoid paying their fair share, especially while companies who can’t afford high-priced lawyers and lobbyists end up paying more.
Alongside tax reform, it’s time to stand up to efforts across our country to undermine worker bargaining power, which has been proven again and again to drive up wages. Republican governors like Scott Walker have made their names stomping on workers’ rights, and practically all the Republican candidates hope to do the same as president. I will fight back against these mean-spirited, misguided attacks. Evidence –
– evidence shows that the decline of unions may be responsible for a third of the increase of inequality among men, so if we want to get serious about raising incomes, we have to get serious about supporting union workers.
And let me just say a word here about trade. The Greek crisis as well as the Chinese stock market have reminded us that growth here at home and growth an ocean away are linked in a common global economy. Trade has been a major driver of the economy over recent decades, but it has also contributed to hollowing out our manufacturing base and many hard-working communities.
So we do need to set a high bar for trade agreements. We should support them if they create jobs, raise wages and advance our national security. And we should be prepared to walk away if they don’t. To create fair growth, we need to create opportunity for more Americans.
I love the saying by Abraham Lincoln who, in many ways, was not only the president who saved our union but the president who understood profoundly the importance of the middle class and the importance of government playing its role in providing opportunities. He talked about giving Americans a fair chance in the race of life. I believe that with all my heart, but I also believe it has to start really early, at birth.
High quality early learning, especially in the first five years, can set children on the course for future success and raise lifetime incomes by 25 percent. And –
– and I’m committed to seeing every 4-year-old in America have access to high quality pre-school in the next 10 years. But I want to do more. I want to call for a great outpouring of support from our faith community, our business community, our academic institutions, from philanthropy and civic groups and concerned citizens, to really help parents, particularly parents who are facing a lot of obstacles, to really help prepare their own children in that 0 to 4 age group.
Eighty percent of your brain is physically formed by the age of 3. That’s why families like mine read, talk and sing endlessly to our granddaughter. I’ve said that her first words are going to be enough with the reading and the talking and the singing.
But we do it not only because we love doing it, even though, I’ll admit, it’s embarrassing, you know, reading a book to a two-week-old or a six-week-old or a 10-week-old, but we do it because we understand it’s building her capacity for learning. And the research shows by the time she enters kindergarten, she will have heard 30 million more words than a child from a less advantaged background.
Think of what we are losing because we’re not doing everything we can to reach out to those families, and we know, again, from so much research here in the United States and around the world that that early help, that mentoring, that intervention to help those often stressed-out young moms understand more about what they can do and to avoid the difficulties that stand in the way of their being able to really get their child off to the best possible start.
We also have to invest in our students and our teachers at every level, and in the coming weeks and months, I will lay out specific steps to improve our schools, make college truly affordable and help Americans refinance their student debt.
And let’s embrace –
– let’s embrace the idea of lifelong learning. In an age of technological change, we need to provide pathways to get skills and credentials for new occupations and create online platforms to connect workers to jobs.
There are exciting efforts underway and I want to support and scale the ones that show results.
As we pursue all these policies, we cant forget our fellow Americans hit so hard and left behind by this changing world from the inner cities to coal country to Indian country.
Talent is universal; you find it everywhere. But opportunity is not. There are nearly 6 million young people aged 16 to 24 in America today who are not in school or at work. The numbers for young people of color are particularly staggering.
A quarter of young black men and nearly 15 percent of all Latino youth cannot find a job. We’ve got to do a better way of coming up to match the growing middle class incomes we want to generate with more pathways into the middle class.
I firmly believe that the best anti-poverty program is a job but that’s hard to say if there aren’t enough jobs for people that were trying to help lift themselves out of poverty.
That’s why Ive called for reviving the new markets tax credit and empowerment zones to create greater incentives to invest in poor and remote areas. When –
– when all Americans have the chance to study hard, work hard and share in our country’s prosperity, that’s fair growth. It’s what I’ve always believed in and it’s what I will fight for as president.
Now the third key driver of income, alongside strong growth and fair growth, must be long-term growth. Too many pressures in our economy push us toward short-termism. Many business leaders see this. They’ve talked to me about it.
One has called it the problem of quarterly capitalism. They say everything is focused on the next earnings report or the short-term share price and the result is too little attention on the sources of long-term growth: research and development, physical capital and talent.
Net business investment, which includes things like factories, machines and research labs, have declined as a share of the economy.
In recent years some of our biggest companies have spent more than half their earnings to buy back their own stock and another third or more to pay dividends. That doesn’t leave a lot left to raise pay or invest in the workers who made those profits possible or to make new investments necessary to ensure a company’s future success.
These trends need to change. And I believe many business leaders are eager to embrace their responsibilities, not just to today’s share price but also to workers, communities and ultimately to our country and, indeed, our planet.
Now I’m not talking about charity; I’m talking about clear-eyed capitalism. Many companies have prospered by improving wages and training their workers that then yield higher productivity, better service and larger profits.
Now it’s easy to try to cut costs by holding down or even decreasing pay and other investments to inflate quarterly stock prices but I would argue that’s bad for business in the long run and it’s really bad for our country.
Workers are assets. Investing in them pays off; higher wages pay off. Training pays off. To help more companies do that, I proposed a $1,500 tax credit for every worker they train and hire. And I will soon be proposing a new plan to reform capital gains taxes to reward longer-term investments that create jobs, more than just quick trades.
I will also propose reforms to help CEOs and shareholders alike to focus on the next decade rather than just the next day.
Making sure stock buybacks aren’t being used only for an immediate boost in share prices; empowering outside investors who want to build companies, but discouraging cut and run shareholders who act more like old-school corporate raiders. And nowhere will the shift from short-term to long-term be more important than on Wall Street.
As a former senator from New York, I know firsthand the role that Wall Street can and should play in our economy, helping main street grow and prosper, and boosting new companies that make America more competitive globally.
But as we all know in the years before the crash, financial firms piled risk upon risk, and regulators in Washington either could not or would not keep up. I was alarmed by this gathering storm and called for addressing the risks of derivatives, cracking down on subprime mortgages and improving financial oversight.
Under President Obama’s leadership we have imposed tough new rules that deal with some of the challenges on Wall Street. Those rules have been under assault by Republicans in Congress and those running for president. I will fight back against these attacks and protect the reforms we have made. We can do that, and still ease burdens on community banks to encourage responsible loans to local people and businesses they know and trust.
We also have to go beyond Dodd-Frank. Too many of our major financial institutions are still too complex and too risky. And the problems are not limited to the big banks that get all the headlines. Serious risks are emerging from institutions in the so-called shadow banking system, including hedge funds, high-frequency traders, non- bank finance companies. So many new kinds of entities, which receive little oversight at all.
Stories of misconduct by individuals and institutions in the financial industry are shocking. HSBC allowing drug cartels to launder money, five major banks pleading guilty to felony charges for conspiring to manipulate currency exchange and interest rates. There can be no justification or tolerance for this kind of criminal behavior.
And while institutions have paid large fines and in some cases admitted guilt, too often it has seemed that the human beings responsible get off with limited consequences or none at all, even when they have already pocketed the gains. This is wrong, and on my watch it will change. Over the course…
… over the course of this campaign, I will offer plans to rein in excessive risks on Wall Street and ensure that stock markets work for everyday investors, not just high-frequency traders and those with the best or fastest connections. I will appoint and empower regulators who understand that too big to fail is still too big a problem. We will ensure…
We will ensure that no firm is too complex to manage or oversee. And we will also process individuals as well as firms when they commit fraud or other criminal wrongdoing.
When the government recovers money from corporations or individuals for harming the public, it should go into a separate trust fund to benefit the public. It could, for example, help modernize infrastructure or even be returned directly to taxpayers.
Now, reform is never easy, but we’ve done it before in our country, and we have to get it right this time. And yes, we need leadership from the financial industry and across the private sector to join with us.
Two years ago, the head of the Chicago Mercantile Exchange, Terry Duffy, published an op-ed in the Wall Street Journal that really caught my attention.
He wrote, and I quote, “I’m concerned that those of us in financial services have forgotten who they serve and that the public knows it. Some Wall Streeters can too easily slip into regarding their work as a kind of moneymaking game divorced from concerns of the Main Street,” unquote.
I think we should listen to Terry Duffy. Of course, long-term growth is only possible if the public sector steps up as well.
So it’s time to end the era of budget brinkmanship and stop careening from one self-inflicted crisis to another. It’s time to stop having debates over the small stuff and focus how we’re going to tackle the big stuff together.
How do we respond to technological change in a way that creates more good jobs than it displaces or destroys? Can we sustain a boom in advanced manufacturing? What are the best ways to nurture startups outside the successful corridors, like Silicon Valley?
Questions like these demand thoughtful and mature debate from our policymakers and government, from our leaders in the private sector, our economists, our academics, others who can come together to the table and on behalf of America perform their patriotic duty to make sure our economy keeps working and our middle class keeps growing.
So government has to be smarter, simpler, more focused itself on long-term investments than short-term politics and be a better partner to cities, states and the private sector. Washington has to be a better steward of America’s tax dollars and Americans’ trust. And please, let’s get back to making decisions that rely on evidence more than ideology.
That’s what I’ll do as president. I will seek out and welcome any good idea that is actually based on reality.
I want to have principled and pragmatic and progressive policies that really move us forward together, and I will propose ways to ensure that our fiscal outlook is sustainable, including by continuing to restrain health care costs, which remain one of the key drivers of long-term deficits.
I will make sure Washington learns from how well local governments, businesses and nonprofits are working together in successful cities and towns across America.
You know, passing legislation is not the only way to drive progress. As president, I will use the power to convene, connect and collaborate to build partnerships that actually get things done, because above all, we have to break out of the poisonous partisan gridlock and focus on the long-term needs of our country.
I confess, maybe it’s the grandmother in me, but I believe that part of public service is planting trees under whose shade you’ll never sit, and the vision I’ve laid out here today for strong growth, fair growth and long-term growth all working together will get incomes rising again, will help working families get ahead and stay ahead. That is the test of our time.
And I’m inviting everyone to please join me to do your part. That’s what great countries do. That’s what our country always has done. We rise to challenges. It’s not about left, right or center; it’s about the future versus the past.
I’m running for president to build an America for tomorrow, not yesterday, an America built on growth and fairness, an America where if you do your part, you will reap the rewards, where we don’t leave anyone behind.
Thank you all. Thank you. I just want to leave you with one more thought. I want every child, not just the granddaughter of a former president or former secretary of state, but every child to be able to reach for her God-given potential. Please join me in that mission — let’s do it together.
Thank you all so much.

Thank you so much! Hello. (Cheers, applause.) Wow,
what an amazing crowd! (Cheers, applause.) It's great to be here. (Applause.) Thank
you all so much. Thank you. Thank you. (Applause.)
I want to thank Renee for her introduction, but more than that, I want to thank her for
what Intel is doing that she just described. And I hope that -- (cheers, applause) -- more
companies will join with her and with Intel to really elevate this issue about diversity and
inclusivity in the workforce here in Silicon Valley, and literally around our country.
I want to thank everyone at Watermark for organizing this terrific gathering and
supporting such a vibrant, visionary community of women leaders here in the Bay Area,
because you can just feel the energy. I love it. I was watching backstage when Brene
Brown was speaking. Isn't she amazing, and the work that she's done, and the insights
she provides?? (Cheers, applause.)
So for 20 years Watermark has been helping people, women grow networks, gain skills,
crack ceilings in technology, entrepreneurship and beyond. So really it's all of you who
should be applauded for being part of this movement.
And I am delighted that I can be here for this first Lead On Conference. It's a great
theme and a very important one, because we do need to lead. We have the information,
we understand the challenge, and if there's any place in the world where Lead On should
be happening, it's right here in a place of big dreams and transformational achievements,
where a kid can have a good idea and then build a billion dollar company, in a place
where faith in the future is so strong that it's taken as a given.
In fact, you all know Moore's Law, computer processors will keep doubling in power
roughly every two years. Well, there's something very American about that kind of
optimism. After all, our country is a great entrepreneurial experiment. Families like my
grandparents who came to our shores with nothing but hope and a willingness to work
hard, the pioneers who set out for California by wagon train, the patriots who dared
imagine that a new nation could be built on the novel proposition that all of us are created
equal.
And even though it's taken centuries to turn that idea into reality, and we're still not there,
those dreamers and doers would have been right at home here, because the innovation
and success we see around us is proof that progress is possible, but also that it is not
inevitable, not in a life, not in a country. After all, Moore's Law doesn't tell the whole
story. Those processors don't get smaller and more powerful on their own. That takes 
2
incredible effort and ingenuity. It takes people not only working hard but working
together.
And America's prosperity and security are not inevitable either. We've learned that we
can bounce back from some pretty tough blows. So we know that progress is possible if
we as a country harness all our talents, find the best and freshest ideas, no matter where
they come from, and grow together, lift each other up.
Today, I want to focus briefly on two areas where you know and I know there's much
more work to be done, women in technology and technology and our broader economy.
Now, many of you in this audience know far more about those two areas than I do or ever
will. You live it every day. You bump your heads on the glass ceilings that persist in the
tech industry. You watch too many of your daughters and granddaughters get diverted
away from careers in STEM.
As familiar as this story is, and we heard Renee summarizing it as she made the
announcement about what Intel will try to do, it is still shocking, the numbers are
sobering.
On the Forbes list of the top 100 venture investors in tech, only four are women. Just 11
percent of executives in Silicon Valley, and only about 20 percent of software developers
overall are women.
One recent report on the gender pay gap in the Valley found that a woman with a
bachelor's degree here tends to make 60 percent less than a man with the same degree.
And we can literally count on one hand the number of women who have actually been
able to come here and turn their dream into billion dollar businesses.
And think of this: While nearly 60 percent of college graduates are now women, they
earn only 18 percent of the computer science degrees. That's actually less than half of
what it was in the 1980s when women earned 38 percent of those degrees. We are going
backwards in a field that is supposed to be all about moving forward.
Women and girls remain underrepresented in STEM education more broadly, and with
STEM jobs growing faster and paying more than many other fields, this puts our
daughters and granddaughters at a disadvantage that can have lasting consequences for
them, their families, and yes, our economy. I think the bottom line here is we cannot
afford to leave all that talent sitting on the sidelines.
So to borrow a familiar phrase, it's time to think different. All of us in the private sector,
government, the nonprofit world and education, we all have a stake in making this better,
from the classroom to the boardroom.
3
I love the way Watermark supports a class at Stanford's Business School focused on
women entrepreneurship.
I really appreciated when Google became the first big tech company to disclose the
demographics of its tech workforce, 83 percent male, 17 percent female, 2 percent
Latino, 1 percent black.
So there's a lot of entry points into tackling this problem. At the Clinton Foundation
we're working with partners to recruit more STEM teachers for schools. We've also
organized a series of code-a-thons to bring together young women software engineers to
collaborate on new apps to promote women's health and wellness, while also building
new professional networks for themselves.
And many of you are involved in other efforts to open avenues for women and people of
color to participate and succeed in this industry, and we have to keep that work going and
growing, because inclusivity is more than a buzzword or a box to check. It is a recipe for
success in the 21st century. Bringing different perspectives and life experiences into
corporate offices, engineering labs and venture funds is likely to bring fresh ideas and
higher revenues.
And in our increasingly multicultural country, in an increasingly interdependent world,
building a more diverse talent pool can't just be a nice to do for business, it has to be a
must do.
Now, of course, the challenges we're talking about are by no means limited to the tech
field. Less than 5 percent of all Fortune 500 CEOs are women. And women
entrepreneurs often have a much harder time accessing capital to start or grow a business.
Up and down the ladder, many women are paid less for the same work, which is why I
think we all cheered at Patricia Arquette's speech at the Oscars because she's right, it's
time to have wage equality once and for all.
But it's not just wage equality. Many working parents all too often don't have access to
commonsense benefits like sick days and paid leave that would allow them to balance
work and family. (Applause.) I think we are embarrassed by, even shocked by the fact
we are just one of nine countries in the entire world without national paid family leave.
Now, you may not realize that because here in California this state has had paid leave for
10 years. And the last time I looked, it seemed to work well for both businesses and
families.
But even that is not a silver bullet. As Sheryl Sandberg and others have reminded us,
even the professional women who have access to these basic benefits are often set back in
their careers, in some cases simply for taking advantage of family leave or flexible
schedules, and in others because of more subtle biases or attitudes in the workplace.
4
When I was a young lawyer and was pregnant, I worked in a small law firm and there
was no family leave policy. It had never come up before. I was the first woman to be a
partner in that law firm. So nobody said anything to me, and I didn't say anything to
them; I just kept getting bigger and bigger and bigger. (Laughter.) And I'd walk down
the halls and some of my partners would avert their eyes. They didn't know what to say
to me. (Laughter.)
So when the time came and I went in and gave birth, the next morning, the lead partner
called and he said two things. He said, "Congratulations, and when are you coming back
to work?" (Laughter.) I said, "Well, thank you very much, maybe in four months."
Pause. He goes, "Oh, okay." He had no idea. (Laughter.) I had no idea, but I was in a
position where I could say, okay, four months.
And too many women even in those days, I can remember so well, they lost their jobs,
they were marginalized, they were demoted for doing one of the most important jobs
anybody in a society has, producing the next generation. (Applause.)
Even though things have changed in many places, not nearly enough and not everywhere,
in so many ways our economy seems to still be operating like it's 1955.
And that's not just a problem for working women, it's a problem for everyone. Just think
about all the hard working families that depend on two incomes to make ends meet.
When one is shortchanged, the entire family suffers. In fact, more than 40 percent of
mothers are now the sole or primary breadwinners for their families, and our economy
depends on the strong participation by women.
Women moving into the workforce in large numbers helped drive a significant amount of
America's economic growth over the past 40 years. Without that movement, the average
American family would be earning $14,000 less today and our gross domestic product
would be about $2 trillion smaller. So when women's participation is limited, our
country's prosperity is limited, too.
And there are still too many women who want to work more and earn more, but are held
back by outdated policies and pressures that hurt them, that hurt their families. That
translates into more families struggling. We're just leaving that money, that growth on
the table. And many families then can't afford their standard of living, they can't afford
to get into and stay in the middle class.
And sometimes when I would go out and talk about women's issues, which I've done for
decades, and particularly as Secretary of State when I said that it was the great unfinished
business of the 21st century because the data on all of this is overwhelming, I could see
men's eyes glaze over. I could see particularly foreign leaders but some Americans too
saying, "Oh yeah, here she goes. Just look like you're concentrating." (Laughter.) "Act
like you're listening and this too shall pass." (Laughter.) 
5
But when we began using the economic data collected by, you know, the International
Monetary Fund and the World Bank and a lot of other organizations, both public and
private, and I could say, do you know how much money you're leaving on the table, do
you know how much greater your economic growth and GDP could be if women were
able to participate fully in the economy, because this great unfinished business of the 21st
century really is moving toward the full participation of women and girls in every aspect
of society all over the world.
That is a goal that has inspired me from the time I was an advocate for children and
families through today, and which I took with me into the State Department, because I
wanted it to be a priority of American foreign policy, because where women are included
you're more likely to have democracy, you're more likely to have stability and prosperity.
So it's not just a nice thing to do, it's important to our economic growth and our security.
And since leaving the government, I've worked on it at the Clinton Foundation with my
daughter. And Chelsea and I are working with Melinda Gates and other partners on an
initiative we call No Ceilings: The Full Participation Project. We're collecting the best
data and research available on the gains women and girls have made around the world
over the past 20 years, and the gaps that still remain. And we're looking at ways to
accelerate progress in the years ahead.
Next month, we'll publish a sweeping global progress report full of data, designed to be
accessible, sharable, even snackable, and I hope you'll all check it out.
Now, there will be good news to celebrate. For example, around the world we've nearly
closed the gender gap in primary education. But there's also bad news, including the
persistent gap between boys and girls in secondary education.
When it comes to technology, the data reveals a massive digital divide. An estimated 200
million fewer women than men are online in developing countries. And you know better
than most how Internet access can help unleash economic growth, lift people out of
poverty.
So this is a problem but it's also an opportunity to build new markets, to improve
education, to spur new growth. Technology has the potential to empower women and
girls like nothing ever before, and it is helping inspire and mobilize grassroots action in
places we'd never expect.
I've seen that firsthand. I've seen how innovations starting right here are helping to lift
people out of poverty, giving them more control over their own lives, helping them hold
their governments accountable.
I'll never forget one woman I met at a tech camp that we set up at the State Department in
Lithuania to train pro-democracy activists from Russia and other former Soviet countries,
help them stay one step ahead of the censors and secret police. It was part of a broader
effort that included investing in new apps and devices to protect dissidents, like a panic 
6
button that a protestor could press on a phone that would signal to friends that she was
being arrested, while simultaneously erasing all of her personal contacts.
For the tech camps we brought along experts from Twitter, Facebook, Microsoft, to
explain how activists could protect their privacy and anonymity online, and thwart
restrictive government firewalls.
I asked one women from Belarus if she was scared that coming to this tech camp would
get her in trouble back home. She said, "No. My government can go to hell," she said.
"I'm here to learn how I can promote democracy."
My goal was to make the State Department a hub of innovation, leading the way with
what we call 21st century statecraft, harnessing new technologies, public-private
partnerships, diaspora networks, tapping expertise right here in Silicon Valley to help
build programs that would address the challenges, from the drug war in Northern Mexico
to the epidemic of rape in Eastern Congo to persecution in the Middle East, and a
partnership we called Civil Society 2.0 helped deliver technology training to more than
1,000 civil society organizations from 80 countries.
And I was very pleased that we were ranked in the State Department as having the most
innovation friendly culture. Now the Federal Government has a long way to go, so you
might think that's damning when saying praise, but we were pleased that the work we
were doing was being recognized that we could effectively partner with Silicon Valley
and the broader tech community.
We had a great public-private partnership called M Women, which brought together
leading telecom companies from around the world to narrow the digital divide. And
there was this wonderful woman from India at the launch event. She represented the
Self-Employed Women's Association, SEWA, an economic cooperative that has
transformed the lives of millions of poor women through microloans and other support.
Here's the story she told me. She said for most of her life she had never seen a cell
phone. She made a meager living by picking flowers and then bringing them to the local
market, where she would go from trader to trader hoping to find a buyer. Sometimes her
entire day was spent this way with nothing sold. Then she joined SEWA and through
SEWA she got a loan for $48 to buy her first mobile phone. Suddenly she could actually
call different markets, arrange to sell her flowers at a fair price in a fraction of the time.
She used the money she saved to start a small business. She stared buying and selling
grain from neighboring villages also using her cell phone. It was her dream that every
woman would get a phone.
Now the bottom line from all the data and all the stories is this, we still have a long way
to go but progress is possible, especially when we make a commitment of resources and
political will. In fact, I think we are at a pivotal point that requires all of us to work
together, roll up our sleeves, figure out what we're going to do, whether it's here in 
7
Silicon Valley or halfway around the world, to help shape the future we want, to close the
digital divide, to unlock our full potential, crack every last glass ceiling.
So technology presents both peril and promise for all human beings, and it also presents
some challenges for our economy. And this is another area where we should be cleareyed
about the gains and the gaps. American innovation, including the work many of
you do, holds such enormous potential, whether it's clean energy or cloud computing or
the Internet of Things, new advances will continue to revolutionize how we live, learn,
and do business. And increasingly the divide between the old economy and the new is
breaking down. The next wave of innovation could reach far beyond not just Silicon
Valley but certainly beyond our nation's borders, creating new industries and remaking
established ones.
And that's important because even the most successful tech startups rarely end up hiring
large numbers of American workers. So there's enormous promise in the intersection of
new technology, IT, but also nanotech, biotech, robotics, and traditional industries like
energy, automobiles, healthcare, education and more. That's really the beating heart of
the American economy. That's where most Americans work. So we should set our sights
on increasing productivity, spurring growth and improving standards for all, not just a
few at top.
And let's be honest, as we've learned the hard way, there can be a real human cost to
some of these amazing innovations. We can't lose sight of that. Just as technology can
boost productivity and create jobs, it has the potential to put many people out of their jobs
by automating processes that used to require a full day's work, advances that are
supposed to move us ahead can end up leaving a lot of people further behind.
And I know from my own travels and discussions how many Americans feel the ground
shifting under their feet. The old jobs and careers are either gone or unrecognizable, and
the old rules just don't seem to apply. And, frankly, the new rules are just not that clear.
And the result is anxiety and dislocation.
Just think about how much our families have changed with caregivers becoming
breadwinners. Well, our jobs have changed, too, and wages no longer rise with
productivity, while CEO pay keeps going up. Young people expect to change jobs much
more frequently, certainly, than their parents. So if we want to find our balance again, we
have to figure out how to make this new economy work for everyone. That's why we
have to ask how we organize ourselves so that technological change helps create more
jobs not just disrupts and displaces them.
And how we try to have rising wages. We have to redouble our efforts to provide the
education and skills, not just for our kids, but for adults, too, so they have the tools they
need to change jobs, or start businesses. And we had to think hard about how to have the
flexibility and support that American families need so that parents can be both great
workers and great parents. And that brings me back to Moore's Law and the march of
progress, because we can't do this without working together. We can't do it without 
8
really empathizing and understanding what our neighbors are going through. But, I think
we can help more families find a way forward, find their footing in the middle class, find
a way to see rising wages and rising hope.
I think it's within our grasp, but I know it's not inevitable. Our economic success is not a
birthright. It can't be inherited. It has to be earned by each generation, just like it was
earned by those who came before us. My grandfather was a factory worker in the lace
mills in Scranton, Pennsylvania, proudly worked there from the age of 11 until he retired
at 65. My father made it to college on a football scholarship, started a small business, my
mother overcame a childhood of abandonment to help build a middle class life for me
and my brothers and I knew I was a beneficiary not only of their love and hard work, but
their aspirations for us and a larger community that believed as they did in America's
promise.
I never doubted how fortunate I was to live in America at a time of such positive change
from the post-war economic boom to the Civil Rights Movement, to the Women's
Moment. And I hope for all of our children the same sense of possibility that I had. Now
it can be easy to get discouraged sometimes if you look only at the headlines, but if you
look at the trend lines you can see there is a movement stirring across our nation. It is
about putting families first. It is about creating a 21st Century economy for 21st Century
families.
You can see it in parents across California who demanded paid sick leave so they
wouldn't have to choose between their jobs and their kids. You could see it in the
security guards right here in Silicon Valley who are organizing for more hours not fewer.
You can see it in the hourly workers in San Francisco who fought to make shift schedules
more predictable and family life more stable. You can see it in the businesses and
community leaders coming together to invest in early childhood education in Oakland.
And you can see it in the moms demanding equal pay for equal work and the dads
demanding access to quality affordable childcare.
So many people are just asking for that same chance, a chance at a living wage at their
dreams and there are many reasons to think that we will reinvent ourselves, we will figure
out how we're going to do this. We'll be part of the solution. That's really what I think
lead on means. Yes, lead on for yourselves. All of us have to come to grips with rising
and falling, as I heard Renee Brown say at the very end. We fall together, we rise
together.
And as women let's do more to help all women lead on and succeed. My friend Madeline
Albright famously said there is a special spot in hell for women who don't help other
women. (Applause.) So what you do does not have to be big and dramatic. You don't
have to run for office. (Cheers, applause.) Although if you do more power to you.
(Cheers, applause.) But, seriously, a helping hand or a kind word can make a big
difference. It's one of those click moments where you realize that helping somebody else
not only feels good, but ends up helping you.
9
The more we stand with each other the more obstacles we can overcome, the more we
will be able to shape our own destiny. That's true not just for women, it's true for
everyone. Indeed, it's true for our entire country. So you came here today under the
banner of lead on, wanting to listen and learn and meet and talk and network, because
there may be nuggets you can pick up and use for your own professional or personal
betterment. But, there may also be ways you can think about, you know, I hadn't thought
about how that could help my friend, or my coworker, my neighbor.
I'm going to try to have a conversation about what I heard today, or about an issue that
you really have been kind of stewing over, but now maybe go out and find some other
people to lead on with you to try to resolve, to prove every single day that progress is
possible in our own lives and believe me I know that's not easy, because we have no time
to waste.
You know in our report, the progress report we're issuing with the Gates Foundation on
the progress women around the world, including in the United States have made over the
last 20 years. We boldly assert that there has never been a better time to be a woman in
the history of the world. (Applause.) And, indeed, I believe that with all my heart. The
changes that I've seen in my own life, the changes I've watched my daughter go through,
and what I now think about the future for my granddaughter, I'm absolutely convinced of
that. But I also believe, and maybe it's part of the American DNA, we have a special
obligation to make it better for each other as well as ourselves and to set an example for
people across the globe.
When my granddaughter Charlotte was born on September 26th, 2014, I have to confess I
was just overwhelmed. I've had lots of friends who got to grandparenthood before me
and who have far more grandchildren than I will ever catch up to. And I heard them and
I listened to them, and I thought that's really nice. (Laughter.) And then all of a sudden
here is this new life, this new hope, this new opportunity, this blessing given to us in my
family. And, of course, her parents, her grandparents, her extended family, we will do
whatever it takes to make sure that this baby has every opportunity in the world. But
even as I say that I know that's not enough. She will become a citizen of our country and
of the world, 20-25 years, god willing, and what kind of world is going to be there
waiting for her? Is it a world of hope or fear? Is it a world of possibility or of shrunken,
destroyed dreams?
I don’t know. I do know that it really matters for the life I hope she will lead that we do
everything we can now to make sure every child is given the same opportunities we will
do our best to provide for her. I believe talent is universal but opportunity is not. And
leading on means in large measure how we expand that circle of opportunity so every girl
and boy has a chance to be all she or he can become with their own efforts, their own
works, but with the support and the love of the rest of us.
The time to start is now. I'm excited about what we can do together, and I believe that all
of us can certainly show the way as we lead on to the kind of future we want.
10
Thank you all very, very much

You know, first of all, there needs to be a decision in our country and on every college campus that any woman who reports an assault should be heard and believed, and there should be a process that is in place — not made up every time that something like this happens — to examine what she is saying, to begin to hear from people to make some kind of decision that is viewed as fair to everybody, because it does need to be fair to everybody. But many women like her feel that they are basically being asked to remain silent. That nobody wants to hear from them, that nobody wants to believe them, and nobody wants to have the comprehensive services that they need. We have colleges that don't even have services in their health clinics, or any cooperative agreement with nearby hospitals even to treat somebody who's come forth. So there's a checklist we're going through that every place should have to be able to comply with. And then, when it comes to the process, I have talked with survivors, and a lot of them don’t want to go into the criminal-justice system. They don't feel that they will be heard or believed there, and it's a difficult process for many. 

"So they want to be able to trust their college or university process, but if they choose to go into the criminal-justice system they should be supported by their college or their university. And there are some good programs; there's just not enough of them, and I want to raise the visibility of them. And I want to also do more to emphasize prevention. 

"This starts at an early age, with the culture playing a role in this, the messages that are sent to young men, the kind of visual images seen all too often, the lyrics of music. We know there's a kind of pressure or expectation about behaviors that are hurtful. And so, we need to do more, starting in high school, I would argue, to begin to try to change those signals; to begin to try to change the culture. 

"I’ve consulted with people who have been through this, are excellent leaders, really strong advocates for survivors, and places that are doing good work — but it's not knit together. The Obama administration has begun to shine a spotlight. I just want to make it a very broad and bright spotlight, and then really move forward very steadily and urgently to try to meet the needs that are out there.

I do, and economic issues in today's world are, of course, about how we get incomes rising again. That's the very center of my economic policy: how we get the deck to be stacked in favor of hardworking people, not just rigged in favor of those at the top — and I’m laying out a lot of those policies. However, here's what I want your [readers] to know, and that is if you want to grow the economy, if you want it to be fairer and have more people really benefitting from their hard work and their productivity, and sharing in the profits they hope to make, you have to focus on women. You have to focus on whether young women, middle-aged women, all women are being treated fairly in the workplace. Because when women aren't, that not only hurts them, it hurts their families, it hurts the economy. 

"When I talk about affordable child care, it's not a social issue, it's an economic issue. When I talk about paid leave and I point out that we are one of the very few countries, the only advanced economy, that doesn’t take into account how much more difficult it is for most women to balance family and work, that's not just a personal issue, that's not just a social issue, that's an economic issue. And, certainly, when I talk about equal pay for equal work, it is long past time we finally got that fixed. As a young woman, or a woman of any age, you should be, as a right, entitled to equal pay for equal work. 

"So these are economic issues, and they're family-income issues, and they're advancement issues. I don’t want to see young women who work hard, who get their education, who are really out there trying to make the most out of their own lives, to wake up — as so many have in the past — and realize they're doing the same job as a young man hired at the same time and they're not being paid the same. That's not America; that's just wrong in a lot of ways. Today, the economic issues and the social and personal issues have to be integrated; that's why, in my economic proposal, we talk a lot about how we need to make the workplace work for women.

I understand that; I know that it's not easy. I remember very well: The first job I had out of law school, I didn’t negotiate; the second job out of law school, I didn’t negotiate. I was just so happy to have a job, and have a job that I thought would be purposeful and give me some real opportunity to grow. But the more I represented people, the more I was a lawyer for people, the more I saw what was happening out in the work world, the more convinced I became that young women need to follow Sheryl Sandberg's advice about leaning in. Doing it in a smart way, not in a way that's going to cause a lot of waves, but a way in which it's going to put your worth front and center. 

"I've worked with a lot of young people in my various jobs over the years, and often when I come to a young woman and I say, 'I want to give you more responsibility' or 'We think you're ready for a bigger job,' she will say, 'Do you really believe that?' or 'Are you sure?' And that's kind of ingrained in us: 'Wait a minute — are you really talking to me?' When I go to a young man and I say, 'We're looking for greater responsibility for you, maybe a different job,' honestly, they will say, in not exactly these words, but the message will be, 'What took you so long? Of course, I am ready, I am able.' So part of my message to young women is, 'First and foremost, believe in yourself, believe in who you are. You have a unique contribution to make to the world; we all have gifts and they are all different gifts. And you have something that can make life better. Not just in your home, with your relationships, but in the broader world of work and society and politics.'

"So study what experts — people who have been very successful, like my friend Sheryl Sandberg and others — tell you about how to do this, and how to take that deep breath. It is scary, but go ahead and try it out with your friends, and just be specific, like, 'Here is what I've done, here is the feedback I've gotten. I really believe I am the best person to continue this project or this work plan, and I want to be sure that I am paid accordingly.' 

"It's scary, but we need women supporting other women, too; we need to remove the mystery about pay. In some places, you can't even find out what somebody else doing the same job is getting. And so, we have to get more transparency and more information, so that young women are supported in the risk they feel they are taking in trying to get paid fairly and equally.

Well, I am thrilled to meet so many young women who believe exactly as you are describing. That they are hopeful, they are optimistic, because there has never been a better time in history or a better place in history to be a young woman than in the United States of America in 2015. And I feel that so strongly. So, yes, do we have some challenges? Of course, we do. We're human beings; we're going to have challenges. But we have to keep working to make our country the place it should be, the place we know it can be. 

"But what really excites me about a lot of millennials is that there is a great devotion to public service. I hear it, I see they get involved in all kinds of service activities and projects in their community, at their workplace, on their campus if they're still in school. So they really do feel the urge to try to improve somebody's life, to try to deal with both small problems here at home, like trying to clean up a park, and giant problems around the world, like combating climate change.
"So I’m thrilled that is the ethos that I am seeing when I go to campuses, when I speak with young women in particular. I would just like to connect that with the very real need to be active politically. Because I often hear from young women that I speak with about these issues. They love public service, they love to be involved in good causes and charities, and all kind of actions that give them a lot of satisfaction, but they are not so enthusiastic about being involved in politics. And what I try to explain is how whatever individual commitment you have, whether it's tutoring a child or working at a food bank, whatever it might be, I applaud you and I thank you. I am very grateful.

I have not. I have not. Like every other woman that I've grown up with, any one of my friends, this has been a journey. And I was coming of age just at the beginning of the women's movement, just when all of the options were being discussed. Now, I was fortunate — I had parents and teachers who never made distinctions, at least that I can recall, between the boys and the girls. They expected us to work hard and do well, which gave me a good foundation to believe that I could be successful if I tried.

"But I didn’t have any smooth path and, in fact, the first time I was seriously thinking about running for office I was an adult. It was 1998. I had never thought about doing this before, and I really was reluctant — in fact, resistant. People were approaching me about running for the Senate in New York, and I kept saying, 'No, I'm not going to do that, I'm sorry, thank you very much.' And they wouldn't give up, and they kept pushing me, and they wanted me to run. And clearly, they saw something in me that I was not yet convinced of — and I kept saying no. I’ll tell you what changed my mind, because there was a moment and that moment happened at a high school in New York City.

I was there as first lady to help highlight a documentary about American women in sports — American women athletes who had gone to the Olympics, who had won tennis and golf tournaments and swimming competitions, all kinds of athletic achievements going back 100-plus years. And so, we were at this high school and there were some great women athletes — Billie Jean King and others were there. And I was asked to say a few words because I really support equal rights for women, and I supported equal participation in school programs under Title IX, so it was a good event for me to be at.

"A young woman who was the captain of the volleyball team introduced me. She was a very impressive, tall young woman. And there had been all this speculation in the press, like, would I run for the Senate, would I say yes; all these people wanted me to. And as I came up, I wanted to shake her hand and thank her because she did a nice job. And I said, 'Thank you so much,' and she bent over to me; the name of the documentary was Dare to Compete, and she whispered in my ear, 'Dare to compete, Mrs. Clinton, dare to compete.' 

"I was momentarily speechless because she had really kind of called me out, to be honest. I mean, I had been a very strong supporter of women running for office, women serving in office. I had actively helped to recruit women to make those elections, then certainly help them raise money and all the rest of it that you do. 

"Then, all of a sudden, this young woman is basically saying, 'Hey, don’t just talk the talk, walk the walk.' And it was from that moment in mid-spring of 1999 that I really began seriously to think about it. I said to myself, Gosh, I don’t want to be hypocritical about this. I go around telling women to be in politics, and now people are asking me. I care deeply about all the issues that affect our country, and I’m saying, 'No-no-no-no-no,' and this young woman is saying, 'Hey, dare to compete.' And a few months later, I said okay and literally just stuck my toe in the water for the first time. It was really a big challenge. I had supported everybody else — I had never done it for me. And I had to learn.

I was there as first lady to help highlight a documentary about American women in sports — American women athletes who had gone to the Olympics, who had won tennis and golf tournaments and swimming competitions, all kinds of athletic achievements going back 100-plus years. And so, we were at this high school and there were some great women athletes — Billie Jean King and others were there. And I was asked to say a few words because I really support equal rights for women, and I supported equal participation in school programs under Title IX, so it was a good event for me to be at.

"A young woman who was the captain of the volleyball team introduced me. She was a very impressive, tall young woman. And there had been all this speculation in the press, like, would I run for the Senate, would I say yes; all these people wanted me to. And as I came up, I wanted to shake her hand and thank her because she did a nice job. And I said, 'Thank you so much,' and she bent over to me; the name of the documentary was Dare to Compete, and she whispered in my ear, 'Dare to compete, Mrs. Clinton, dare to compete.' 

"I was momentarily speechless because she had really kind of called me out, to be honest. I mean, I had been a very strong supporter of women running for office, women serving in office. I had actively helped to recruit women to make those elections, then certainly help them raise money and all the rest of it that you do. 

"Then, all of a sudden, this young woman is basically saying, 'Hey, don’t just talk the talk, walk the walk.' And it was from that moment in mid-spring of 1999 that I really began seriously to think about it. I said to myself, Gosh, I don’t want to be hypocritical about this. I go around telling women to be in politics, and now people are asking me. I care deeply about all the issues that affect our country, and I’m saying, 'No-no-no-no-no,' and this young woman is saying, 'Hey, dare to compete.' And a few months later, I said okay and literally just stuck my toe in the water for the first time. It was really a big challenge. I had supported everybody else — I had never done it for me. And I had to learn.

Well, first I want thank you, Nick, for having me here and a few of my friends in the college. I just had a terrific tour of the advanced manufacturing laboratory. I got to talk with the instructor and four of the students, all of whom are high school students who are doing what you have described as the great opportunity to mix your high school years with college learning and college credits as you move forward.

And I am really pleased to be at a community college that is visionary and effective and trying to serve as a bridge for people who are non-traditional but coming back to add to their stills all the Beltway high school students who are taking advantage of the opportunities. And the cooperation between the college and the high school is something I want to see a lot more. This is a real model for how we can provide more continuous learning starting in high school but going as far as necessary to help better prepare not only young people but all people for the economy that is awaiting us.

And before we get started — because I want to hear from each of you, I want more information about what you see as challenges as students and educators and the opportunities you hope to take advantage of — I just want to tell you a little bit about why I'm here today. I think we all know that Americans have come back from some tough economic times. And our economy and our country are much better off because American families have basically done whatever it took to make it work. But I think it's fair to say that as you look across the country, the deck is still stacked in favor of those already at the top. And there's something wrong with that. There's something wrong when CEOs make 300 times more than the typical worker. There's something wrong when American workers keep getting more productive, as they have, and as I just saw a few minutes ago, is very possibly possible because of education and stills training, but that productivity is not matched in their paychecks. And there's something wrong when hedge fund managers pay lower tax rates than nurses or the truckers that I saw on I-80 as I was driving here the last two days. And there's something wrong when students and their families have to go deeply into debt to be able to get the education and skills in order to make the best of their own lives. I looked at the figures. The average Iowa graduate from a four-year college comes out with nearly $30,000 in debt. And that's I think the ninth-highest debt load in the country. And people are struggling. I met earlier today with a young student who is piecing together work and loans, knowing full well he's going to come out owing a lot of money.

We're got to figure out in our country how to get back on the right track. And I'm running for president because I think that Americans and their families need a champion, and I want to be this champion. I want to stand up and fight for people so that they cannot just get by, but they get ahead and they can stay ahead. And a lot of people in the last few days have asking why do you want to do this? What motivates you? I thought a lot about it and I guess the short answer is I've been fighting for children and families my entire adult life, probably because of my mother's example. She had a really difficult childhood, was mistreated, neglected, but she never gave up. She had to basically be on her own at the time she was 14 but she just kept going. My father, who was a small business man, believed you had to work hard to make your way and do what you had to do to be successful, and provided a good living for our family. And then I was thinking, too, about the lessons from my church. You're supposed to give back. You're supposed to do what you can to help others. And that's what I tried to do. And we'll have more time to talk about as that as we go forward.

When I got out of law school, I worked for the Children's Defense Fund. One of the projects there was literally going door to door. This was back in the '70s when kids with disabilities were basically shut out of our schools. And thanks to your great former Senator, Tom Harkin, that's no longer the case. But I was knocking on doors asking is there anybody school age not in school, and finding blind kids and deaf kids and kids in wheel chairs who were just left out. And I was able in Arkansas to work to try to improve education there and give more kids chances who really deserved them. And as first lady, to fight for health care reform and keep fighting until we get health care insurance for kids. Then as Senator, dealing with the problems that faced New York after 9/11 and trying to help people get what they needed, the victims' families and first responders. It was an incredible honor to do that. Then, as secretary of state, standing up for our country.

So when I look at where we are as a country, I'm so absolutely convinced that there isn't anybody anywhere who can outcompete us, who has better values, who can do more to provide more people the chance to live up to their own God-given potential. But we can't take that for granted. So I want to be the champion who goes to bat for Americans in four big areas, four big fights that I think we have to take on, because there are those who don't agree with what I think we should be doing. And they're pretty powerful forces.

We need to build the economy of tomorrow, not yesterday. We need to strengthen families and communities because that's where it all starts. We need to fix our dysfunctional political system and get unaccountable money out of it once and for all, even if that takes a constitutional amendment, and we need to protect our country from the threats that we see and the ones that are on the horizon.

So I'm here in Iowa to begin a conversation about how we do that and to hear from people about what's on your minds, what the challenges that you see are. And I'll work hard to meet as many people. I'll be rolling out ideas and policies about what I think will work. But I want it to be informed by what's actually working and to build on what works going forward, and to stand up for those who have a different vision of our country, a different one than what I grew up with and a different one than I think is best for everybody.

And to meet some of the people who work here, as I did when I was walking through, and as you've just introduced yourself. I am excited to hear from you about what it takes to get a small business up and going and keep it growing in an increasingly competitive global economy.

Small business is the backbone of the American economy. Here in New Hampshire, 96 percent of all businesses are considered small businesses. And they employ more than half of the workers, the employees, in the state of New Hampshire. So New Hampshire is a perfect example of what it takes to start and grow a small business.

And I come from a small business family. My father had a very small business. He printed drapery fabrics in a print plant. And he did much of the work himself, sometimes with day laborers, sometimes with my mother and my brothers and me, literally, taking the squeegee, pour the paint on the silk screen. You take the squeegee, you go down, then you lift it up and you go to the next and you keep going.

And I saw where now there's a machine that you just bought that's printing on all kinds of material. And I'm thinking back to those years in my father's small print plant. But he made a very good living because of his hard work and his absolute willingness to do whatever it took to design, to produce, to sell the products that were at the heart of what he produced.

And so from my perspective, I want to be sure that we get small businesses starting and growing in America again. We have stalled out. I was very surprised to see that when I began to dig into it, because people were telling me this, as I traveled around the country the last two years, but I didn't know what they were saying.

And it turns out that we're not producing as many small businesses as we used to. And a recent world study said that we are 46th in the world in the difficulty to start a small business. There are lots of issues and we'll get into some of those, I hope, Dave, and the rest of you, as well.

So I want to hear from each of you, because part of what I'm doing in this campaign is making my own decisions about what we need to do. I want to embed what I propose as policies, not in ideology, not in some philosophy, but in the real daily lives and experiences of American workers and business owners and everybody who had a stake in making sure that the economy is working again. Really, we have to do more for young people, because what we're finding is that with student debt — and New Hampshire has the highest student debt numbers of any state in the country — that interferes with the young people taking certain jobs, buying a house, even getting married and certainly starting a business.

When I was in Iowa last week, I met a young man, who — his dream had been to own a bowling center is his hometown. He graduated from college, because he'd worked, like you, during the summers, and he — and he wanted to own that business. He got a chance to do it.

With his student debt, it was really a struggle, because even though he was very responsible, he had done everything we expect a young person to do to try to better himself, he was running into real credit problems.

And even now, he's got the business, but he runs it — he has a little grill and restaurant, he, with two employees, is trying to make a go of it. Here's a young, ambitious guy. And when I think about my dad, it was a lot easier in those days to have an idea, to get what you needed and to go to work.

The other piece of this, as we were walking around and Dave was telling about all of the incredible machines that are used here in production, all but one are from another country. And many of them, if I'm right, Dave, are from Europe.

And so you think — I mean, Europe has high wages. They have high costs. Why are they producing these advanced machines instead of us? What's wrong with this picture?

You can — you can see that maybe lower-cost places that are mastering the art of machine production would be competitive, but these are high-value machines. These are very sophisticated machines.

How do we get that into more basic production again so that we can resume our lead in manufacturing, something that I think is essential? A lot of people disagree with me. They say, "Oh, you know, those days are over." I don't believe it.

You walk around here, you see these machines from, you know, Italy or Germany or wherever else they're from. Why? Why aren't we producing those machines? What do we need to do to jump-start advanced manufacturing once again in our country?

So my bottom line is, we've gone through some tough times, and I think Americans have done everything they could think of to do to get through those tough times.

But now it's not enough just to tread water; we need to get ahead and stay ahead, and people need to feel that their work is being rewarded, that the deck is not stacked in favor of those at the top, that they too have a chance to go as far as their hard work and their aspiration will take them.

So in order to put together a set of policies for my campaign, I really want to make sure that they are in line with the real lives and the real working experiences of the people that I would love to represent as your president.

So we're going to take on four big fights. You know, we're going to fight to build the economy of tomorrow, not yesterday, and make the middle class mean something again in this country. We're going to fight to have strong families and strong communities. And of course, it's no accident that I'm at a [inaudible] whose customer market is between six months and six years. That's — that's right where I am focused these days.

I want to make sure we have a functioning political system. I'm going to fight for that.

I will work with anybody. I've done that. I did it as senator. I will do it again.

But I will also stand my ground when we need to, and part of that is getting unaccountable money out of politics, because we cannot afford that, even if it takes a constitutional amendment.

And then finally, we always have to be vigilant to protect our country against the threats we know — we can see them — but then the threats we can't see — pandemic diseases, cyber warfare, et cetera.

So I'm excited about this campaign. I'm thrilled to be back in New Hampshire. I see some of my friends out there in the audience.

And the first place I ever came for any political campaign was in 1991 when I was here campaigning for my husband, in October of 1991. I celebrated my birthday here in — in Keene, and I have a lot of wonderful memories.

So with that, Dave, I'm going to turn it back to you, and — and we can start hearing from some of the folks.

Thank you so much. I am absolutely delighted to be back here at Columbia. I want to thank President Bollinger, Dean Janow, and everyone at the School of International and Public Affairs. It is a special treat to be here with and on behalf of a great leader of this city and our country, David Dinkins. He has made such an indelible impact on New York, and I had the great privilege of working with him as First Lady and then, of course, as a new senator.
When I was just starting out as a senator, David's door was always open. He and his wonderful wife Joyce were great friends and supporters and good sounding boards about ideas that we wanted to consider to enhance the quality of life and the opportunities for the people of this city. I was pleased to address the Dinkins Leadership and Public Policy Forum in my first year as a senator, and I so appreciated then as I have in the years since David's generosity with his time and most of all his wisdom. So 14 years later, I'm honored to have this chance, once again, to help celebrate the legacy of one of New York's greatest public servants.

I'm pleased too that you will have the opportunity after my remarks to hear from such a distinguished panel, to go into more detail about some of the issues that we face. I also know that Manhattan Borough President Gale Brewer is here, along with other local and community leaders.

Because surely this is a time when our collective efforts to devise approaches to the problems that still afflict us is more important than ever. Indeed, it is a time for wisdom.

For yet again, the family of a young black man is grieving a life cut short.

Yet again, the streets of an American city are marred by violence. By shattered glass and shouts of anger and shows of force.

Yet again a community is reeling, its fault lines laid bare and its bonds of trust and respect frayed.

Yet again, brave police officers have been attacked in the line of duty.

What we've seen in Baltimore should, indeed does, tear at our soul.

And, from Ferguson to Staten Island to Baltimore, the patterns have become unmistakable and undeniable.

Walter Scott shot in the back in Charleston, South Carolina. Unarmed. In debt. And terrified of spending more time in jail for child support payments he couldn't afford.

Tamir Rice shot in a park in Cleveland, Ohio. Unarmed and just 12 years old.

Eric Garner choked to death after being stopped for selling cigarettes on the streets of this city.

And now Freddie Gray. His spine nearly severed while in police custody.

Not only as a mother and a grandmother but as a citizen, a human being, my heart breaks for these young men and their families.

We have to come to terms with some hard truths about race and justice in America.

There is something profoundly wrong when African American men are still far more likely to be stopped and searched by police, charged with crimes, and sentenced to longer prison terms than are meted out to their white counterparts.

There is something wrong when a third of all black men face the prospect of prison during their lifetimes. And an estimated 1.5 million black men are "missing" from their families and communities because of incarceration and premature death.

There is something wrong when more than one out of every three young black men in Baltimore can't find a job.

There is something wrong when trust between law enforcement and the communities they serve breaks down as far as it has in many of our communities.

We have allowed our criminal justice system to get out of balance. And these recent tragedies should galvanize us to come together as a nation to find our balance again.

We should begin by heeding the pleas of Freddie Gray's family for peace and unity, echoing the families of Michael Brown, Trayvon Martin, and others in the past years.

Those who are instigating further violence in Baltimore are disrespecting the Gray family and the entire community. They are compounding the tragedy of Freddie Gray's death and setting back the cause of justice. So the violence has to stop.

But more broadly, let's remember that everyone in every community benefits when there is respect for the law and when everyone in every community is respected by the law. That is what we have to work towards in Baltimore and across our country.

We must urgently begin to rebuild the bonds of trust and respect among Americans. Between police and citizens, yes, but also across society.

Restoring trust in our politics, our press, our markets. Between and among neighbors and even people with whom we disagree politically.

This is so fundamental to who we are as a nation and everything we want to achieve together.

It truly is about how we treat each other and what we value. Making it possible for every American to reach his or her God-given potential—regardless of who you are, where you were born, or who you love.

The inequities that persist in our justice system undermine this shared vision of what America can be and should be.

I learned this firsthand as a young attorney just out of law school—at one of those law schools that will remain nameless here at Columbia. One of my earliest jobs for the Children's Defense Fund, which David had mentioned—I was so fortunate to work with Marian Wright Edelman as a young lawyer and then serving on the board of the Children's Defense Fund—was studying the problem then of youth, teenagers, sometimes preteens, incarcerated in adult jails. Then, as director of the University of Arkansas School of Law's legal aid clinic, I advocated on behalf of prison inmates and poor families.

I saw repeatedly how our legal system can be and all too often is stacked against those who have the least power, who are the most vulnerable.

I saw how families could be and were torn apart by excessive incarceration. I saw the toll on children growing up in homes shattered by poverty and prison.

So, unfortunately, I know these are not new challenges by any means.

In fact they have become even more complex and urgent over time. And today they demand fresh thinking and bold action from all of us.

Today there seems to be a growing bipartisan movement for commonsense reforms in our criminal justice systems. Senators as disparate on the political spectrum as Cory Booker and Rand Paul and Dick Durbin and Mike Lee are reaching across the aisle to find ways to work together. It is rare to see Democrats and Republicans agree on anything today. But we're beginning to agreeing on this: We need to restore balance to our criminal justice system.

Now of course it is not enough just to agree and give speeches about it—we actually have to work together to get the job done.

We need to deliver real reforms that can be felt on our streets, in our courthouses, and our jails and prisons, in communities too long neglected.

Let me touch on two areas in particular where I believe we need to push for more progress.

First, we need smart strategies to fight crime that help restore trust between law enforcement and our communities, especially communities of color.

There's a lot of good work to build on. Across the country, there are so many police officers out there every day inspiring trust and confidence, honorably doing their duty, putting themselves on the line to save lives. There are police departments already deploying creative and effective strategies, demonstrating how we can protect the public without resorting to unnecessary force. We need to learn from those examples, build on what works.

We can start by making sure that federal funds for state and local law enforcement are used to bolster best practices, rather than to buy weapons of war that have no place on our streets.

President Obama's task force on policing gives us a good place to start. Its recommendations offer a roadmap for reform, from training to technology, guided by more and better data.

We should make sure every police department in the country has body cameras to record interactions between officers on patrol and suspects.

That will improve transparency and accountability, it will help protect good people on both sides of the lens. For every tragedy caught on tape, there surely have been many more that remained invisible. Not every problem can be or will be prevented with cameras, but this is a commonsense step we should take.

The President has provided the idea of matching funds to state and local governments investing in body cameras. We should go even further and make this the norm everywhere.

And we should listen to law enforcement leaders who are calling for a renewed focus on working with communities to prevent crime, rather than measuring success just by the number of arrests or convictions.

As your Senator from New York, I supported a greater emphasis on community policing, along with putting more officers on the street to get to know those communities.

David Dinkins was an early pioneer of this policy. His leadership helped lay the foundation for dramatic drops in crime in the years that followed.

And today smart policing in communities that builds relationships, partnerships, and trust makes more sense than ever.

And it shouldn't be limited just to officers on the beat. It's an ethic that should extend throughout our criminal justice system. To prosecutors and parole officers. To judges and lawmakers.

We all share a responsibility to help re-stitch the fabric of our neighborhoods and communities.

We also have to be honest about the gaps that exist across our country, the inequality that stalks our streets. Because you cannot talk about smart policing and reforming the criminal justice system if you also don't talk about what's needed to provide economic opportunity, better educational chances for young people, more support to families so they can do the best jobs they are capable of doing to help support their own children.

Today I saw an article on the front page of USA Today that really struck me, written by a journalist who lives in Baltimore. And here's what I read three times to make sure I was reading correctly: "At a conference in 2013 at Johns Hopkins University, Vice Provost Jonathan Bagger pointed out that 'only six miles separate the Baltimore neighborhoods of Roland Park and Hollins Market. But there is a 20-year difference in the average life expectancy.'"

We have learned in the last few years that life expectancy, which is a measure of the quality of life in communities and countries, manifests the same inequality that we see in so many other parts of our society.

Women—white women without high school education—are losing life expectancy. Black men and black women are seeing their life expectancy goes down in so many parts of our country.

This may not grab headlines, although I was glad to see it on the front page of USA Today. But it tells us more than I think we can bear about what we are up against.

We need to start understanding how important it is to care for every single child as though that child were our own.

David and I started our conversation this morning talking about our grandchildren; now his are considerably older than mine. But it was not just two longtime friends catching up with each other. It was so clearly sharing what is most important to us, as it is to families everywhere in our country.

So I don't want the discussion about criminal justice, smart policing, to be siloed and to permit discussions and arguments and debates about it to only talk about that. The conversation needs to be much broader. Because that is a symptom, not a cause, of what ails us today.

The second area where we need to chart a new course is how we approach punishment and prison.

It's a stark fact that the United States has less than 5 percent of the world's population, yet we have almost 25 percent of the world's total prison population. The numbers today are much higher than they were 30, 40 years ago, despite the fact that crime is at historic lows.

Of the more than 2 million Americans incarcerated today, a significant percentage are low-level offenders: people held for violating parole or minor drug crimes, or who are simply awaiting trial in backlogged courts.

Keeping them behind bars does little to reduce crime. But it is does a lot to tear apart families and communities.

One in every 28 children now has a parent in prison. Think about what that means for those children.

When we talk about one and a half million missing African American men, we're talking about missing husbands, missing fathers, missing brothers.

They're not there to look after their children or bring home a paycheck. And the consequences are profound.

Without the mass incarceration that we currently practice, millions fewer people would be living in poverty.

And it's not just families trying to stay afloat with one parent behind bars. Of the 600,000 prisoners who reenter society each year, roughly 60 percent face long-term unemployment.

And for all this, taxpayers are paying about $80 billion a year to keep so many people in prison.

The price of incarcerating a single inmate is often more than $30,000 per year—and up to $60,000 in some states. That's the salary of a teacher or police officer.

One year in a New Jersey state prison costs $44,000—more than the annual tuition at Princeton.

If the United States brought our correctional expenditures back in line with where they were several decades ago, we'd save an estimated $28 billion a year. And I believe we would not be less safe. You can pay a lot of police officers and nurses and others with $28 billion to help us deal with the pipeline issues.

It's time to change our approach. It's time to end the era of mass incarceration. We need a true national debate about how to reduce our prison population while keeping our communities safe.

I don't know all the answers. That's why I'm here—to ask all the smart people in Columbia and New York to start thinking this through with me. I know we should work together to pursue together to pursue alternative punishments for low-level offenders. They do have to be in some way registered in the criminal justice system, but we don't want that to be a fast track to long-term criminal activity, we don't want to create another "incarceration generation."

I've been encouraged to see changes that I supported as Senator to reduce the unjust federal sentencing disparity between crack and powder cocaine crimes finally become law.

And last year, the Sentencing Commission reduced recommended prison terms for some drug crimes.

President Obama and former Attorney General Holder have led the way with important additional steps. And I am looking forward to our new Attorney General, Loretta Lynch, carrying this work forward.

There are other measures that I and so many others have championed to reform arbitrary mandatory minimum sentences are long overdue.

We also need probation and drug diversion programs to deal swiftly with violations, while allowing low-level offenders who stay clean and stay out of trouble to stay out of prison. I've seen the positive effects of specialized drug courts and juvenile programs work to the betterment of individuals and communities. And please, please, let us put mental health back at the top of our national agenda.

You and I know that the promise of de-institutionalizing those in mental health facilities was supposed to be followed by the creation of community-based treatment centers. Well, we got half of that equation—but not the other half. Our prisons and our jails are now our mental health institutions.

I have to tell you I was somewhat surprised in both Iowa and New Hampshire to be asked so many questions about mental health. "What are we going to do with people who need help for substance abuse or mental illness?" "What are we going to do when the remaining facilities are being shut down for budget reasons?" "What are we going to do when hospitals don't really get reimbursed for providing the kind of emergency care that is needed for mental health patients?"

It's not just a problem in our cities. There's a quiet epidemic of substance abuse sweeping small-town and rural America as well. We have to do more and finally get serious about treatment.

I'll be talking about all of this in the months to come, offering new solutions to protect and strengthen our families and communities.

I know in a time when we're afflicted by short-termism, we're not looking over the horizon for the investments that we need to make in our fellow citizens, in our children. So I'm well aware that progress will not be easy, despite the emerging bipartisan consensus for certain reforms. And that we will have to overcome deep divisions and try to begin to replenish our depleted reservoirs of trust.

But I am convinced, as the congenital optimist I must be to live my life, that we can rise to this challenge. We can heal our wounds. We can restore balance to our justice system and respect in our communities. And we can make sure that we take actions that are going to make a difference in the lives of those who for too long have been marginalized and forgotten.

Let's protect the rights of all our people. Let's take on the broader inequities in our society. We can't separate out the unrest we see in the streets from the cycles of poverty and despair that hollow out those neighborhoods.

Despite all the progress we've made in this country lifting people up—and it has been extraordinary—too many of our fellow citizens are still left out.

Twenty-five years ago, in his inaugural address as Mayor, David Dinkins warned of leaving "too many lost amidst the wealth and grandeur that surrounds us."

Today, his words and the emotion behind them ring truer than ever. You don't have to look too far from this magnificent hall to find children still living in poverty or trapped in failing schools. Families who work hard but can't afford the rising prices in their neighborhood.

Mothers and fathers who fear for their sons' safety when they go off to school—or just to go buy a pack of Skittles.

These challenges are all woven together. And they all must be tackled together.

Our goal must truly be inclusive and lasting prosperity that's measured by how many families get ahead and stay ahead...

How many children climb out of poverty and stay out of prison...

How many young people can go to college without breaking the bank...

How many new immigrants can start small businesses ...

How many parents can get good jobs that allow them to balance the demands of work and family.

That's how we should measure prosperity. With all due respect, that is a far better measurement than the size of the bonuses handed out in downtown office buildings.

Now even in the most painful times like those we are seeing in Baltimore ...

When parents fear for their children...

When smoke fills the skies above our cities...

When police officers are assaulted...

Even then—especially then—let's remember the aspirations and values that unite us all: That every person should have the opportunity to succeed. That no one is disposable. That every life matters.

So yes, Mayor Dinkins. This is a time for wisdom.

A time for honesty about race and justice in America.

And, yes, a time for reform.

David Dinkins is a leader we can look to. We know what he stood for. Let us take the challenge and example he presents and think about what we must do to make sure that this country we love—this city we live in—are both good and great.

And please join me in saying a prayer for the family of Freddie Gray, and all the men whose names we know and those we don't who have lost their lives unnecessarily and tragically. And in particular today, include in that prayer the people of Baltimore and our beloved country.

Thank you all very much.

Oh, hello. Hi, how are you? Well, it's wonderful to be back in Nevada and here at Rancho. I am delighted to be joined by a number of young people who are going to talk with me and all of you about their lives, their stories, and in particular immigration.
I want to acknowledge my friend and Congresswoman Dina Titus. Thank you so much for being here. And it is Cinco de Mayo, so that's especially appropriate day for us to be having this conversation.

I want to begin by thanking everyone at Rancho High School for hosting us today. I'm looking forward to hearing from each of our panel participants. I have a lot of wonderful memories from my time here in Nevada. I've gone door to door meeting with families not far from the school.

I've met with a lot of culinary workers and other workers who keep the economy going strong. I accompany the registered nurse on 12-hour shift at St. Rose Dominican Hospital and then was very pleased to go back to her home and have dinner with her and her kids.

And I know how hard hits Nevadans work by the great recession. This date in particular suffered some very tough blows. There were a much higher than average home for closure rate for example, a lot of people lost their jobs or their hours or cut dramatically which made it more difficult for them to continue to make a good living.

We now see that this state is coming back from those top economic times. Families have found a lot of different ways to make it work for them. We also saw people once again starting businesses, thinking about sending their kids to college. Maybe doing some home repairs, maybe putting a little bit aside for retirement. But we're not yet back on our feet.

We have certainly climbed out of the hole we were in, but now we've got to do more than just get by. We have to get ahead and stay ahead.

And there are a lot of ways that we have to think about how we do that together. I think that it's important to recognize that even with all of the hard work and sacrifices so many families made, in many ways, the deck is stacked in favor of those at the top. And I'm well aware that in Las Vegas there is nothing worse than a stacked deck.

I want to reshuffle the deck. I want to be a champion for hard-working Americans. I want to work across party lines. I want to work with the public and the private sector. I want people to get back to the good old-fashioned American style of problem solving and setting us on back the right course.

Now, to help reshuffle the deck, people have to do their part. They have to, you know, step up and take education seriously. They have to be willing to work hard because nothing is given to you. My dad was a small businessman and when I say that he was a really small businessman, you know, just a few day workers from time to time. My mom, my brothers and I, but he understood hard work was the path forward in the United States. He made a good living for our family and I will forever be grateful for that. Because when families are strong, America is strong. And I am convinced having thought for families going all the way back to my years in law school and ever since, there is nothing more important.

Now in this campaign, I think we have to wage and win four big fights. One is to build the economy of tomorrow, not yesterday. And that means we've got to be really focused on what is going to prepare young people and we have to start early. Education is the key. But education in the first years of life is essential. Because now we know that brain development really has formed by the time a child is three or four. So, we've got to do more to make sure every child has the best chance to do well in school, to get ahead, to charge his or her own future, to live up to his or her own God-given potential.

It's also essential that we strengthen families and communities and that's means we have to finally once and for all fix our immigration system. This is a family issue. It's an economic issue, too.

But it is at heart a family issue at. And if we claim that we are for families, we have to pull together and resolve the outstanding issues around our broken immigration system. The American people support comprehensive immigration reform, not just because it's the right thing to do, and it is, but because they know it strengthens families, strengthens our economy, and strengthens our country. That's why we can't wait any longer. We can't wait any longer for a path to fall and equal citizenship.

Now this is where i differ with everybody on the republican side. Make no mistakes, today not a single republican candidate announced or potential is clearly and consistently supporting a path to citizenship. Not one.

When they talk about legal status, that is code for second-class status. And we should never forget who this debate is about and you're going to meet some of them in just a minute. People who work hard, who love this country, who pay taxes to it and wants nothing more than to build a good future for themselves and their children.

We're talking about the young people at this table. They are dreamers in much more than name. They are kids that any parents or grandparent would be proud of. And I don't understand how anyone can look at these young people and think we should break up more families, or turn away more hard workers with talent to help us build the kind of country we all want to see.

So, I will fight for comprehensive immigration reform and a path to citizenship for you and for your family across our country. I will fight to stop partisan attacks on the executive actions that would put dreamers, including those with us today, at risk of deportation. And if Congress continues to refuse to act as president, I would do everything possible under the law to go even further.

There are more people, like many parents have dreamers, and others, with deep ties and contributions to our communities, who deserve a chance to stay and i will fight for them.

The law currently allows for sympathetic cases to be reviewed but right now most of these cases have no way to get a real hearing. Therefore, we should put in place a simple, straightforward, accessible way for parents of dreamers and others with a history of service and contribution to their communities, to make their case and to be eligible for the same deferred action as their children. But that's just the beginning. There's much more to do to expand and enhance protections for families and communities to reform immigration and enforcement and detention practices, so they are more humane, targeted, and effective. And to keep building the pressure and support for comprehensive reform.

You know, our personal basis, the first time I ever met anyone who was in our country working was when I was about 12 years old, as I recall. And through my church, I was recruited, along with some other girls in our Sunday school class to serve as babysitters on Saturday for the small children, so the older children could join their parents in the fields because believe it or not when I was growing up in the Chicago area, it was farm field as far as the eye could see. And the migrants, immigrant laborer would come up, through the Texas up through Midwest, up to Chicago, then up to Michigan. And we were asked to try to help out.

I remember going to the camp where the families lived and taking care of the little kids, while kids at my age were doing really hard work.

And what stuck in my mind was how at the end of the day there was a long road from in the camp that went out to a kind of dirt road in the middle of the fields. And the bus that had the workers from the field down it that came back around 4:00, 5:00 in the afternoon, stopped and let off the parents and the older brothers and sisters and all these little kids started running down the path to see their moms and dads and their big brothers and sisters. And they were scooped up by these really, really tired people.

And I just watched this and I thought, they're just like me and my brothers. You know, when my dad comes home from work, and we go out to see him. After he has come back from his day of doing what he had to do to help support us. I've never gotten that experience to the image out of my mind.

And so, for me, this is about what kind of people we are and what kind of country we have. And I am actually convinced this is in our economic interest. It's in the interest of our values and it's even in the interest of our long-term security as a nation. So, you know, where I stand. And there can be no question about it because I will do everything I can, as president, and during this campaign, to make this case.

I know there are people who disagree with me but I want them to have a conversation with me. Because the facts are really clear. You know, we know how much people who are working hard contribute to our economy, both in what they buy and what they pay in Texas. In fact in New York, which I know a little bit about because I representative for eight years and I lived there now, our undocumented workers in New York pay more in taxes than some of the biggest corporations in New York. So, I'm ready to have this discussion with anybody, anywhere, any time.

But let me turn to the people who are living this story. I want you to meet them. I want you to hear from them. And I'm going to start with you, Asther , if you will introduce yourself, and talk about your own life and what brings you to the table today.

 Thank you. Wow. Thank you. I am thrilled to be here with all of you.
And Sarah, that was excellent. I thank you so much.

And I hope you'll get to know Sarah and spend time with her and help her as she works so hard between now and February 1st.

And Dean and Gary, thank you for welcoming us to your beautiful home; what a delight it is to be here with you. 

Somebody asked me the other day, well, you know, you're going to these events, where you're taking time to actually talk and listen to people, is that really what you're going to do?

And I said, well, yes, it is because not only do I learn a lot but I also feel like it's the best way to make those connections that will not only give me a firm foundation in the caucus here in Iowa or in a primary in New Hampshire—because it really is about people-to-people connections if we're really talking about what we want to do—but it will also give me the kind of information I need to be an even better president.

And I just had another example about that. You may know that Gary's a radiologist and right before we came in, we were talking about his work. He's an expert in breast cancer. And I asked him about the mammography recommendations that's at least the women in the room I'm sure have seen over the last several years.

And he was giving me some really important insight into the commission that made those recommendations and his expert opinion about them. And I'm so grateful to you for that because it's the kind of discussion that you can't have unless you have an opportunity to actually talk and listen with people.

I want to thank all of you for coming. I am delighted to have this chance to talk with you. I think what we're going to do is I'll say a few words about the campaign and what I want to achieve. And then we'll have a chance to talk individually and I'll be able to hear from each and every one of you.

I have been incredibly impressed over the last several years at how hard the American people have worked to pull ourselves out of the Great Recession. People have made a lot of sacrifice. People have lost jobs. They lost houses. They lost the chance to finish or go on with their education. And they did everything that they could think of to do to get back on their feet.

And I'm so relieved that, as I travel around the country and talk with people, there is a sense that we are on our feet. We're not running yet but we are on our feet. And we can see the changes that are happening in people's lives and put them in a context as to where we go from here now as a country.

I'm very grateful to President Obama for the hard decisions he made when he inherited the mess that he inherited when he became president in 2009. 

And I know that he and I and everyone who was in his administration realizes that, unless the American family and the American worker is strong, everything we want to see happen for our country is going to be much more difficult. And so I come to this campaign committed to being a champion for Americans and American families.

That's what my work has been throughout my entire adult life, starting with my first job out of law school when I went to work for the Children's Defense Fund, all the way through to the work that I did as secretary of state promoting women's rights, promoting the rights of people who would otherwise be marginalized or left on the sidelines.

And I know that, although we have to—it's still hard to imagine exactly how we're going to get to the point where people are not just getting by but getting ahead again and staying ahead because, look, the deck is still stacked in favor of those at the top. We know that.

And so we have to be especially focused on how we're going to bring about the changes that will ignite opportunity for everybody willing to work hard for it again.

So when I look at where we are as a nation and where we need to be, I see four big challenges that we have to take on together. And there are going to be fights, because they're—if they were easy, they would already be done. So I will posit that right now.

Number one, we have to build the economy of tomorrow, not yesterday. It needs to be innovative. It needs to be sustainable. It needs to be producing good jobs with rising wages. We need to get back into the habit of actually rewarding workers with increases in their paychecks for the increases in productivity and profitability that they have helped to bring about. 

You know, Warren Buffett has said it, but so have a lot of other people. There's something wrong when the average American CEO makes 300 times more than the typical American worker or when hedge fund managers themselves make more and pay less in taxes than nurses and truck drivers.

In fact, I heard a statistic the other day that really made a big impact on me, that the top 25 hedge fund managers together made more money than all the kindergarten teachers in America.

And when you think about value, what it is that's going to get us moving again, I think kindergarten teachers are really important. And so—[laughter and applause]—and we've got to make a claim on becoming the 21st century clean energy superpower. Iowa has really helped us. The RFS, the renewable fuel standard and a lot of the investments that have made here, has been one of the reasons why we have made some real progress but not near enough. And other countries are going to seize that title unless we do what we have to.

It's also imperative that we give people the tools through education and job training and skills not just in rhetoric but in reality so that they can make the most out of their own lives. And for me that starts at the very beginning.

I have been a child advocate and a child development proponent for my entire adult life because it's what I really care about, what I believe in. And I think we have to start before kindergarten. We have to have universal pre-K but we also have to do more to reach out to families so they know the tools they should use to be their children's first teachers.

Now we've got this new granddaughter who is unbelievable. And we were with her this weekend. You know, we go and just stare at her. I mean, that's what—it's really—it's wonderful and silly at the same time.

But we also read to her. Here she is, 7.5 months old, we're reading and reading and reading. And I imagine among her first words were—will be, you know, "Enough with the reading," because between her mom and her dad and Bill and I, we're constantly doing that.

But we're doing it not only because we love to do it and we love to see her begin to reach her hands out and grab onto the books, we're doing it because we know that it aids her brain development. That has been one of the great discoveries with brain research in the last couple of decades.

We increasingly can see what happens when you are literally feeding the brain as well as the body of these infants and then the babies and the toddlers. That will help them be better prepared when they actually end up in kindergarten and it will begin to close the achievement gap because, you know, we're going to do everything we can for our granddaughter. Charlotte will get every opportunity we can possibly imagine.

But what kind of country will she grow up in?

And what kind of world will she enter?

And what will happen to all of the other infants, babies, toddlers and children in our country today?

So we have to look at education from the very beginning. Then we have to make sure that we are doing all we can to empower our teachers, to make sure that they have the support of parents so that they can do the job they have been trained to do to help prepare our kids.

And then we've got to make sure that college is affordable. And that cannot happen at the rate we're going unless we change the way we fund college education for young people who wish to have that experience.

Many of us in this room, I bet, as I did, borrowed money to go to college. But then we were able to pay it back because it wasn't such an overwhelming burden as it has become now.

The average student in Iowa graduates with $30,000 in debt and that then makes it very difficult for them to start a business or buy a new home or even get married, as one young man told me not so long ago.

So we have to deal with the indebtedness to try to move toward making college as debt-free as possible. I'm 100 percent behind President Obama's proposal for free community college. We've got to try to get that through.

And then we've got to try to do everything we can to make college available and affordable to all of our young people. 

You know, when you think about our economy today, it is absolutely linked to education. It is also linked to strong families and strong communities. And that's our second challenge, because a lot of families and communities have been under tremendous strain.

One of the biggest stresses in anybody's life is health care. I will fight to protect the Affordable Care Act and I will work to make the changes that are required. 

We are really now in a different world, 16 million people who didn't have health insurance who now do. We have to do everything we can to make sure that Medicare is as available and protected and affordable as possible. And we have to be sure that where there are changes that can be made we try to find ways to work across the aisle to make them.

I don't hear my friends on the other side of the aisle talking as much as they used to about getting rid of the Affordable Care Act. I think the reason is is because there are a lot of people that they may actually be encountering from time to time who have been helped. And we need to make sure to make the argument over and over again, what will you do if you say to people we're going to take away the health care we finally have been able to provide for you? That is just unacceptable.

But there are some problems. You know, one of the problems—and I heard about this in Iowa—is what happens when a 26-year old becomes a 27-year old and is no longer eligible to be on his or her parents' policy? That was one of the best changes in the Affordable Care Act. And the fact is that a lot of young people aren't making the income they need yet to be able to afford their own health care. So we have to look out to see what we're going to be able to do to help them.

There are two issues that fall into this category that are huge strains on families. And I heard about them first—I heard first in Davenport and I heard about it all the way across the state until I got to Council Bluffs. One is the drug epidemic—meth, pills in Iowa and then I got to New Hampshire.

And at my very first coffee shop meeting I heard about the heroin epidemic in New Hampshire. In the past year I've been told reliably we had more people die of drug overdoses in America than automobile accidents for the first time in our history.

This is tearing families apart but it is below the surface. People aren't talking about it because it's something that is hard to deal with.

I also heard a lot about untreated mental health problems. And so many communities, so many states turning their backs on people with mental health problems. Facilities are being closed. Even though we now require there to be treatment in the Affordable Care Act, there's not enough available treatment. Not enough resources.

The other day, I was in California at an event. And I just said what I said. I said, you know, mental health is not being treated. We claim we're now going to be able to help people with their health care problems, but if we don't help with mental health, we're leaving out a huge number of people. And a young woman came up to me and asked me a question. She said, "Did you know that we're having all these suicides in my high school?" I said, "No, I did not know that before I came." She goes, "Well, we've had four young people kill themselves in the last months."

Then I was in New York at an event this past way. Said the same thing that I said to you, and then I was visiting with people. And a woman come up—came up to me and she goes, "Thank you for mentioning mental health. We have gone in the last six months to four funerals of friends of my children who have killed themselves."

I have to tell you, when I started running, when I started thinking about this campaign, I did not believe I would be standing in your living room talking about the drug abuse problem, the mental health problem and the suicide problem. But I am now convinced I have to talk about it. I have to do everything I can in this campaign to raise it...  ...to end the stigma against talking about it.

And we also have a challenge that affects everything we do, and that is to fix our dysfunctional political system. And that—that underlies everything that we can possibly hope to get done. I'm very committed to meeting with anybody, going to have any conversation, to try to find common ground. But we also have to stand our ground. And we have to try to figure out how we're going to get people to work with us for the betterment of our country, the betterment of people who need a good positive support system, whether it be health care of aid for college, or anything else.

We also have to address the unaccountable dark money in politics. I think the supreme court made a grave error with its Citizens United decision. And I will do everything I can do to appoint supreme court justices who will protect the right to vote, and not the right of billionaires to buy elections. 

And, you know, I've been consulting with a lot of legal experts. and some of them think there may be a way to get legislation through that will enable us to regulate this kind of use of money in our political system which is so corruptive and corrosive. But others agree with former Justice John Paul Stevens, who recently wrote a book in which he said it's going to take a constitutional amendment. I will work for that if that's the only way to fix this problem, because we cannot continue with the kind of assault on our democracy, on voting rights, and on the opportunity for us to know where the money is coming from that influences our political system.

Now, for us , we have challenges around the world. I was coming through the—the garage, there's a TV that Dean and Gary have, and it was talking about ISIS in Iraq. We have threats that we know of. That we can begin to try to figure out how best to address. It's not just dictators. Also disease, climate change, which—I think global warming is a threat to us. But we have to be confident and strong in understanding that there are many ways to approach the problems that America will be confronting in the world. And we must do so in cooperation with our friends, our allies, our fellow democracies around the world.

I am convinced that the 21st century can once again be a century in which the United States leads and helps to set the values and the standards. But we have to have an agreement, first of all, foremost, with our own country and in our own Congress about how to do that. I was outraged, and said at the time, that when a group of Republican senators sent a letter to the ayatollah of Iran, in a—essentially criticizing the actions of the president of the United States—I don't care what party you are. We have one president, and we should stand behind that president when he's trying to work out very difficult problems. 

So, I know there are a lot of hard choices ahead of us. I wrote a book called "Hard Choices." There is it. There is it. I'll sign that for you. But I think we're more than up to it. You know, I am a confident optimist about where America's future lies. That doesn't mean I'm not aware of how difficult it is. I'm going into this race with my eyes wide open about how hard it is to be the president of the United States. I have a little experience about that. And I have to tell you, I find it, you know, very reassuring because I do have that experience to know what's possible and how best to proceed. but I also know that we are living in an incredibly complicated time in American history. It is not a time for easy answers or glib answers or one-liners or applause lines. Those are all great. That's part of campaigning.

But at the end of the day, we need a president who has both the experience and the understanding to deal with the complexity of the problems that we face. And I appreciate what both Dean and Sarah said about the experiences that I've been privileged to have during the last decades. I really believe that I can go into that office on the very first day and begin to do what is required.

So I look forward to visiting with each and every one of you. I look forward to working with you, not only as we move toward the caucuses. I would be honored to have your support on February 1st. And then I will need your help as we move toward the general election because I don't want this election to be about me. I want to it to be about us and the agenda that we want to set for our country.

You know, when I campaigned so hard against then-Senator Obama, I was, you know, working as hard as I could. He was working as hard as he could. And at the end of the day, he won. And then I went to work to make sure he got elected our president. And I was so relieved and happy when that finally happened.

The Sunday after the election, Bill and I went for a walk in an area that Sarah would know, a big kind of nature preserve near where we both live, and we just wanted to let down because we'd been working so hard to elect then-President-Elect Obama. So we're wandering through the woods, and Bill's phone rings, which is sort of a miracle since we have terrible cell coverage there. And he pulled it out of his pocket and it was the president-elect. And he said, "You know, I'd like to talk to you and Hillary." And Bill said, "Well, we're kind of in the middle of a forest. Can we get home and call you back?"

And so we did. And when he called back—when Bill called back, he talked to the president-elect and then I talked to him. And he said to me, "I want you to come see me in Chicago." And I said, "Sure. When?" He goes, "As soon as you can get here." And I said, "Well, OK." So the following Thursday, I went to Chicago and he asked me if I would serve as secretary of state.

And I said, "You know, Mr. President-elect, I, you know, I really want to go back to the Senate. I'm very flattered, but there are a lot of other people who could do that." "No," he said. "I know what I want and I want you to do this." I said, "Well, you know, Mr. President-elect, I really want to go back to the Senate and that's where I think I can best work with you and best serve you." He goes, "Look," he said, "I don't want to hear from you again until you say yes." [laughter] So, you know, I told him "no," you know, again later. And he just said, "Don't—don't call me until you say yes." And I did tell my husband, I said, "He's so persistent. I've told him no twice and he keeps saying, you know, I'm waiting for you to say yes." And Bill said, "Yeah, well, I asked you to marry me twice before you said yes." [laughter]

So I guess there's a connection there. So then I—I stayed up that night and I—I thought, you know, supposed I'd been honored to win, and I had wanted this incredibly talented American to be in my cabinet and I'd asked him, I'd want him to say yes. And I thought, you know, what's what I have to do.

So I called him and I said, "You know, President-elect, I would be honored to serve in your cabinet." And we immediately got starting to work. A few months later, on my very first trip as secretary of state, I went to Asia. And I went in part because everybody I called, all of the leaders in the countries that I spoke with, were saying, "You know, we just don't know whether the United States cares about us anymore; nobody's been paying any attention to us; you know, we're—we're kind of feeling like we're not important to you anymore." I said, "Well, you are, and the president feels that way; I feel that way; I will come see you."

So I went out. And one of the countries that I went to was Indonesia, in part because it's a very important country, but also President Obama had a personal connection with it. And my idea was not only to talk to the leaders, but to talk to the people, what's called public diplomacy. So that as you were—as I was out there talking to presidents and prime ministers and others, I would also find ways of trying to connect to to tell people, "Look, the United States really does care about the world we're trying to create together, and that's part of my message from our new president."

So I went on a—I agreed to go on a show in Jakarta, which was their morning show. And it was like a combination of MTV and a reality show and all that. I had no idea what I was getting myself into. And so I go onto the set and people are jumping and they're singing and they're dancing. And it's called "The Awesome Show."

So I'm on "The Awesome Show," and I'm talking a little bit to the interviewer. And then they ask people if they have any questions. And somebody in the audience says, "I want to ask you, we saw you campaigned very hard against President Obama; he campaigned very hard against you. He won. You lost. And then he asked you to be his secretary of state. Why?"

And I realized, you know, in a lot of these new democracies and other places of course, you run against somebody and you lose, you could get exiled or imprisoned, even killed; not asked to be secretary of state. And so this was a very legitimate question. And I thought, "I have to answer this in a very, you know, serious way that maybe they can understand in our democracy, you know, we do try to close ranks after we have hard elections," at least that's what we should be doing. I said, "Well, you're right. We campaigned hard. He won. I lost. I then campaigned to get him elected. He asked me to be secretary of state, and I said yes for the same reason: We both love our country."

And at the end of the day to me...  ...that's what elections are supposed to be about. We can disagree and we will. We'll have all kinds of arguments, even, about the best way to do things. But we should be coming from a place of love—of loving our country and of respecting one another. And we have to rebuild this feeling in our country again.

We have too much work to be done. We have too many people who deserve a better shot at a future for themselves and their families. I want to be their champion. And with your help, I will get up every single day doing the best I can to make sure that the country we love is the country we deserve to have.

Thank you all.

Well first let me thank all of you in particular our round table participants for being with us today and thanks to Bike Tech for welcoming us to this amazing facility. I'm delighted to have this chance to talk more about small businesses. But I want to begin with what's happening more broadly with America's economy and America's families. Because I've always believed fundamentally that when our families are strong, our country is strong.
And we've come back from very tough economic times. I don't need to tell anybody here that. Our economy and our country are in much better shape today, and in large measure because families worked so hard. They took extra jobs, they skipped vacations, they scrimped and they postponed going to college they saved and made it work.

But the deck is still stacked for those at the top.

People aren't getting a fair shake. Something is wrong when CEOs earn more than 300 times than what the typical American worker earns and when hedge fund managers pay a lower tax rate than a truck drivers or nurses.

I'm running for president because everyday Americans and their families need a champion and I want to be that champion. I want families to do more than just get by — I want you to get ahead and stay ahead. I want to make the words "middle class" mean something again.

Now, small businesses like Bike Tech and the ones you'll here about today have to be at the heart of that effort — creating jobs, driving growth, and giving millions of Americans the chance to live up to their God-given potential.

Now, I did not learn this from politics — I learned it from my father who was a small business man. He had a very small business, printing drapery fabrics and then went out and sold them. My mother, my brothers and I and occasionally a few day laborers would help out with the actual printing process. That's what put food on the table and gave us a solid middle class home.

Today, small businesses all over our country have worked their way back from the perfect storm of the crisis, when sales and credit, together, dried up at the same time. Businesses are finally starting to sort out how they can grow again, add jobs, and planning for the future.

But the deck is stacked here as well. Ask any small business owner, as I have, and they'll tell you: It is wrong that it is so easy for big corporations to get a break but so hard for small businesses even to get a loan. It shouldn't take longer to start a business in America than it does in Canada and France! But that is the fact.

I want to be a small business president. A president who does make it easier to start and run a small business in this country, so it seems less like a gamble and more like an opportunity. We have to level the playing field for our small businesses.

First, we need to cut the unnecessary red tape that costs small businesses time and money and keeps new entrepreneurs out. We should scrub federal regulations to find responsible ways to make life easier for small businesses, and we should offer new incentives to state and local governments to do the same, because that's where many of the obstacles still lie.

Second, we need to simplify tax filing and provide targeted credits and deductions for small businesses, not just the big corporations that can afford the lawyers and lobbyists to find every single loophole.

Third, we'll use technology to expand access for small businesses into new markets, whether it's across town, across the state, or across the world. That's what I did in partnership with eBay in Upstate New York when I was a Senator. We started a public-private partnership to help small businesses that had never sold beyond their local community reach customers very far away.

Fourth, and I want to emphasize this today, I will fight to level the playing field for small businesses so they can get the financing they need to build and hire… including women and minority entrepreneurs who face extra barriers. And this morning when I was reading the Des Moines Register — big head line: REPORT: Iowa Ranks Last for Women Owned Business. This could not be a more timely article for our discussion today and although it says Iowa has made some progress it says Iowa has seen the lowest growth in the most businesses owned by women from 1997 to 2015 and women owned companies have the least economic clout in Iowa and all the states and the District of Columbia. So this is a very important issue for our whole county but I think it is especially important for our friends here in Iowa because access to credit can be as important to growing a small business as it is for the big ones.

And you shouldn't have to be a Fortune 500 company to get a loan.

For many small businesses these loans have always come from community banks with deep local ties. But today those same local banks are being squeezed by regulations that don't make sense for their size and mission. Like endless examinations and paperwork designed for banks that measure their assets in the many billions. And when it gets harder for small banks to do their jobs it gets harder for small businesses to get their loans. We can ease these burdens for community banks without harming consumers — and without easing up one bit on the Wall Street. We should not apply the same restrictions on community banks as those needed by the big banks.

Let's be clear about this: It's not the big banks that need relief from Washington — it's small banks and small businesses. We should be doing more to rein in risky behavior on Wall Street and "Too Big to Fail," banks not less.

I fully support the regulations in Dodd-Frank on the big banks but we should pass common sense community banking reform right now, however, the republicans in the congress insist on using this issue to give relief to community banks as a Trojan Horse for rolling back the protections for consumers and rolling back the rules for the big banks — as we're seeing right now in what Republicans are introducing — we should call it what it is: a cynical attempt to game the system for those at the top.

Our goal should be helping community banks serve their neighbors and customers the way they always have. To make it easier to give our responsible loans to responsible small businesses so they can do what they do best, create jobs and help families get ahead.

So I'm eager to hear the ideas from everyone around the table. And I see some elected officials in the audience and am eager to hear your ideas. What are the obstacles you've faced and how can you overcome them? What more can we do to help small businesses grow?

Wow, what a great way to begin and to all of you especially Mary Carmen and LaKeisha thank you for speaking on behalf of providers and parents. We're going to hear from everybody as we go through our event today. I want to thank everyone at New Horizons for welcoming us to this facility. And to all my friends at SEIU as well.
We're here today to talk about childcare. But its important to understand that when we talk about childcare we're talking about the economy, we're talking about families, we're talking about fairness, we're talking about all of the values that we believe are necessary to raise healthy successful productive children in society today. I want to say just a few words about what's happening with our economy and more broadly about America's families. Because I think when our families are strong America is strong. And if we don't have strong families its really hard for us to be the kind of strong nation that sets the table for our children to do better.

We've come back from really tough economic times. The great recession just really knocked people to the ground. People lost their jobs, they lost their homes they postponed doing things like going to college, they had to keep working if they had a job even if they were at or beyond retirement. It really took a lot out of everybody. And we are in much better shape today in large measure because families made the sacrifice and worked really hard despite the odds. They took extra jobs like some of you they skipped what were really necessities but they figured out how to make them not as urgent a need, like not driving the car as much or not buying all the food that the family required. So everybody made it work.

But the deck is still stacked for those at the top. Something is wrong when top CEOs earn 300 times more than what the average worker earns and I heard a statistic the other day that was kind of related to what we're talking about today, if you take the salaries, the compensation, of the top 25 hedge fund managers in America, those 25 men make more than all the kindergarten teachers in the country put together. Now I happen to think that kindergarten teachers and child care providers and child development specialists are really important because they are the people that are helping to get our kids off to a good start working with families.

And I'm running for President because I think everyday Americans need a champion, a champion that gets up every single day and goes to work and goes to bat and does everything I can to help families just get by which is what you were talking about. I want you to get ahead and stay ahead. I want to make the words "middle class" mean something again.

Now, when we think about strong families being the backbone of our country, we have to recognize that our economy is different and our families are different. I was born in Chicago and the families of today are not exactly the same as the family I was born into. Most families need two incomes or two jobs if there is only one parent to make ends meet. And 40 percent of moms, just like LaKeisha, are now the sole or the primary breadwinners in their household. So that's a big different from the way it was when I and others here were growing up. Yet we haven't adjusted our economy or our government programs to take those differences into account. You know I can remember very well when I was a young lawyer before I had my daughter in my law firm where I worked in Arkansas, around 3 o'clock I'd see all the women who worked there sort of whispering into their phones and I didn't know why, but it was just like clockwork, well they were trying to make sure their kids got home safely because their kids were walking home or getting off the bus and going home waiting for mom to get home. And it wasn't accepted back then that you could be a good worker and a devoted parent at the same time, especially for women. But that kind of juggling act is what most of us do all the time now and therefore we have to adjust how we support families so that you can be the best you can be and how we support small businesses like so many child care providers so you can make a living while you do what you love.

So we know that with Moms and Dads squeezing every minute out of a 24-hour day and with you Mary Carmen saying you work 17 hours, it's hard to even find time to breathe. And many can't count on anybody being there to help you because everyone you know is working hard and trying to make ends meet.

So finding high quality, affordable, flexible childcare is more important than ever. But it's also harder than ever.

Federal and state funding for childcare has not kept up with changing times and rising demand. So it's no surprise that out-of-pocket childcare costs for families have soared by nearly 25 percent over the past decade. And now the Republican budget that is being worked on by the Congress would cut funding even more. Making it so much more difficult. America cannot turn its back on our children and our working parents. Family values are economic values. I'm going to be putting forth plans to fix this. We should do it now. And Republicans should either get on board or get out of the way.

Because it's now time for us to face reality. Our families need new solutions today, they need real help not promises. And I'm very clear about what I think needs to be done but I want to hear from all of you because what I'm doing in traveling around the country is taking ideas I have, some of which I have been developing for many years, but hearing from people on the front lines, whether its immigration or small business or today child care.

First, to bring down out-of-control family costs, we need to make investments in childcare a national priority.

What President Obama has proposed is a good start. I'll look for responsible ways to go even further, whether it's providing tax cuts to new parents or grants to states targeted for infants and toddlers. Whatever its going to take to give both LaKeisha and the providers more opportunities. And you know its embarrassing, I traveled to 112 countries as your Secretary of State, there are only 9 countries left in the world that have no form of paid family leave, and we are one of them. And the other ones are tiny countries, countries without many resources. Every other country has something that says, we think it's really important that moms bond with their newborn babies, we think its important that a dad can have some time, we think it's important that children can take care of their parents as those parents maybe are ill or failing. So we've got to have better systems in place with more support and we have to focus on quality so that all our kids have access to the best possible care. And many of you know how hard that is because you have two people helping you take care of 16 children. There are a lot of places where there would be one person trying to take care of 16 children. We have to reducing overcrowding and increasing training and most importantly we have to increase wages. Because you expect to make a living doing the most important job in the world if you have to sacrifice your own family. That doesn't make any sense to me at all.

So to all the childcare workers here today, I want you to know that the service and care you provide strengthens our economy, it strengthens families and helps prepare children. You should be valued for that, respected for that, and you should be paid for that.

Now I am a new Grandmother and it's really wonderful but just being around my new 7 1/2 month old granddaughter just reinforces what I believe, which is when when we short-change childcare workers, we short-change kids and short-change Americans' future. It makes it harder to retain the best staff. It makes it harder to keep up those high standards.

So we have to stand firmly together and united on behalf of your right to organize, your right to bargain collectively, your right to fighting together for the higher wages that reflect the value of your work. There is nothing more important to the family or to the support of the family, which you are, than caring for our youngest children.

That's why I so respect the vital work that SEIU is doing, under the leadership of President Mary Kay Henry, is so vital. I think it is absolutely essential.

And I want to say something else about it, when people talk to me about the need to improve our educations system, I agree, because I want every child to have the best possible education. But education starts at birth. Education starts when that little baby comes into the world. In fact we now know, because of brain research, that about 80% of the brain is actually developed by the age of 3 and 4. If we don't take care of our babies we are short changing them on their brain development and then when we get to kindergarten no matter how hard they try, no matter how much their mom says do your best, do your homework, no matter how hard their teacher works they're going to be at a disadvantage. That's wrong, it isn't right that a child like my grandchild will have all of these opportunities because we're reading and we're talking and we're singing but we're not working 17 hour days and we're not trying to get by on $5100 after the expenses are paid. So yea, we're going to make sure that Charlotte has every chance in the world but I want every baby, everyone your babies and every baby you take care of to have exactly the same chances.

Ultimately, this is, for me, about how we work together to give every child the chance to live up to his or her God-given potential. You see it in their faces when they are put in your arms from the very first minute. You want to keep that light in their eyes, you want to make sure they have every opportunity to fulfill that God-given potential. And I'm here because I want to help you and the parents you serve unlock that potential, when we unlock the full potential of every American, we can unlock the full potential and prosperity of America.

So for me, this is as important an as anything else that I'm going to talk about in my campaign for president. Thank you.

Well, this is so exciting, to be here with all of you and to be here for such an important cause, to make sure that the Democratic Party and particularly the Democratic Women's Council recruits and trains and fields more women for public office right here in South Carolina. There are a lot of longtime friends here; I won't try to mention everybody, but I do want to thank Susan and the entire board for DWC. And I want to thank Gilda, who I think has been in the state legislature since '92, started in elementary school and worked her way up. Former Governor Jim Hodges, we're delighted he is here, thank you. A national Democratic chair, a state Democratic chair, of course Don and Carroll Fowler, so happy to see them. Your candidate for the Senate last time, Joyce Dikerson, thank you Joyce.
I was thinking on the way down here that I first came to South Carolina as a young lawyer working for the Children's Defense Fund, started by your own South Carolina native Marian Wright Edelman from Bennettsville. I came back many times going to Renaissance weekend, going to Hilton Head, then going to Charleston. Made a lot of friends, had a lot of good times, and am thrilled to be back, and I'm back because I want to support you.

You know, the theme of this day of events is how to build a party and how to build a party that really respects and includes women and gives women in this state a chance to not only be at the table but at the head of the table. Carrying with them their Democratic experiences and their life experiences. And you're right, I am running to live again at 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue. But I don't want to be there all by myself—I want Democrats elected from the local to the county to the state to the federal level, once again making the case that when Democrats win, Americans win.

I want to say just a few words about what's happening to America's families and what's happening with our economy. Because I've always believed fundamentally that when families are strong, America is strong.

And we've come through some really tough economic times. I looked at the statistics and South Carolina has pulled itself up and other places have as well. American families have made a lot of sacrifices. People lost jobs, people lost homes, people had to put college on the back burner, retirement on the back burner. But everybody just kept going. It took a lot of determination, and across America we're beginning to see the results of all that hard work. And I will say that there does seem to be a pattern, Democratic presidents, and there are two in particular that I'm thinking of, over the last 35 years, seem to inherit a mess of problems. Have you noticed that? So then they have to dig us out of the ditches they find themselves in and put us back on the right track, and of course I'm talking about Bill Clinton and Barrack Obama, but of course presidents don't do it alone—they do it with the American people. It's a partnership.

And today we are standing again, but we're not yet running. And we face a choice: Are we going to hand over our country once again to people and policies that crashed our economy before and that will shred all the progress we've made?

[Crowd shouts NO!]

Well that's obviously the right answer, but that's what this campaign is going to be about. Because we're going to have to stand up to the people who want to keep the deck stacked in favor of those at the top. We are going to fight to make sure that the success of our country is shared across the economy and that more families have the chance to get ahead and not just to get by but to stay moving forward with the kind of confidence and optimism that has always marked the best times in America.

It's time to make the words "middle class" mean something again. They should represent a solemn promise that anyone willing to work hard can earn a decent living and a better life, not just get by paycheck to paycheck.

That's the middle class I grew up in. My dad was a small businessman, and when I say small, it was small. He ran a small drapery printing business. And he literally had a print plant with big long tables that had silk screens, and sometimes my mother, my brothers, and I would help to pour the paint in and take the squeegee and then we'd walk down the table, print the fabrics, and then he'd go out and sell them. And it was a good decent middle-class life that he provided to my brothers and me. And I am so grateful, and there was never in my mind in fact that's what so many of us believed when we were growing up. The future seemed so unlimited—of course we had to fix a lot of things in the country, starting with civil rights and human rights, but the opportunity ladder always was held out there.

I just came from Kiki's Chicken and Waffles, which I highly recommend, and I was meeting with a group of African American businesswomen, and they were telling me what they needed to keep growing and build an even better future, it sounded so much like the conversation I remember around my dinner table. That's what links us together past all the other differences that sometimes divide us.

Being middle class in America should mean you feel in control of your own financial destiny.

It should mean you have a little more, so you can worry a little less.

It should mean that you can invest in your future and the future of your children, putting aside some for education, putting aside some for retirement.

You should be able to go to sleep at night knowing that everything you've worked for won't be lost in a flash because of decisions that are made or failed to be made in Washington.

So therefore, I want to be a president who makes corporations live up to the basic guarantee that when workers help produce record profits, those workers should get a real share of the rewards instead of it all going to those at the top.

And you know the statistic. Something is wrong when top CEOs earn 300 times more than a typical American worker, or here is my latest least favorite statistic, the 25 biggest hedge fund managers earn more than all the kindergarten teachers in America...combined. What does that say about our values and the importance of preparing our children through education to make it in a very competitive global economy?

Today, too many politicians who want to return to the same failed top-down economics are mouthing the words "middle class." But this is something you have to believe in and something you have to be ready to fight for. If those words are going to have meaning again, they've got to be backed up by real solutions, not empty rhetoric. And those solutions have to speak to the ways that the economy has changed.

Today, 40 percent of mothers are the sole or primary breadwinners in their household. And more Americans are working multiple jobs just to make ends meet. Parents are rushing home from work to get their kids home from school and maybe get them off to practice or rehearsal. They are squeezing every minute out of a 24-hour day with barely enough time to breathe, let alone relax.

I remember when I was a practicing lawyer back in Little Rock, and around 3 o'clock every afternoon all of the women who worked in the firm were hunched over their phones kind of whispering into them and at first I didn't know what was going on, and then I realized they were checking to see if their children got home safely.

Many people today can't count on relatives to pitch in because so many families now are scattered across the country. Now I happen to be extremely lucky because my amazing 8-month-old granddaughter lives near me, so I get to see her a lot.

But nobody expects everything to come easy, that's not part of life, we know that, but it shouldn't be quite so hard to get ahead and stay ahead.

So I do believe that everyday Americans and their families need a champion. A champion who will fight for them every single day. Not for some Americans but for all Americans. And I want to be that champion. I want to get up every single day going to work for you, standing up for you, making a difference for you.

Now, take the issue of equal pay. I don't think I'm letting you in on a secret when I say, too many women still earn less than men on the job. And women of color often make even less. And then there's the so called, motherhood penalty, with many women taking a pay cut when they have children. All this lost money adds up. For many families, we're talking about thousands of dollars every year. That's money that could go for rent or groceries or a new car or into the college fund. Now we could fix this. If Republicans would get on board, we in fact could fix this today but they won't.

One Republican candidate dismissed equal pay as "a bogus issue." Another said Congress was "wasting time" worrying about it. One even said that efforts to guarantee fair pay reminded him of the Soviet Union.

And to that I say what century are they living in?

But thankfully the American people know the truth. And the truth is that when any parent is short-changed, the entire family is short-changed. And when families are short-changed, America is short-changed. And therefore this is not a women's issue this is a family issue and an American economic issue.

And here's what we should do instead to close the wage gap. First, we should pass the Paycheck Fairness Act, which gives women the legal tools we need to fight discrimination at work.

I introduced this legislation in the Senate back in 2005 and kept sponsoring it again and again. Well it's time to get this done, once and for all.

Second, we should promote pay transparency across our economy to ensure women have the information they need to negotiate fairly. You can't stand up for equal pay if you don't know whether you're paid equally. You remember the Lilly Ledbetter case, she didn't know for the longest that she wasn't being paid the same as her male coworkers doing the same jobs. Postings for new jobs or promotions should come with salary ranges. Large companies should report on how fairly, or not, they're compensating workers, male or female.

And we should applaud those businesses and communities that are leading the way with best practices and real accountability. I think transparency when it comes to pay is our friend. The more we can bring it out from under the table to put it on top, the more information we can have to advocate for ourselves and advocate for each other.

Third, we need to raise wages for the lowest paid jobs in America -- which are, they are disproportionately held by women, especially women of color—we need to make it easier for more women to enter higher paying fields like science and engineering and technology. But I want to say something that a lot of people may not know even in this room full of activist and well informed democrats.

In most states today, waitresses, bartenders, hairstylists, and others who rely on tips are paid even lower than minimum wage.

Some are paid as little as two dollars and thirteen cents an hour. And they are also more likely to face exploitation, wage theft, and sexual harassment. Think about somebody you may know, think about the mom trying to succeed at work and give her kids the support they need with a job that pays her $2.13 an hour. And forces her to put up with some pretty awful behavior by clients or customers or bosses to try to get those tips to at least push it up to the federal minimum wage level.

And finally, we need workplace policies like paid leave and flexible scheduling that allow parents to take care of their obligations at home without sacrificing pay at work.

Now, it's no secret that on equal pay and so many other issues, we're up against some pretty powerful forces, political and economic, that will do say and spend whatever it takes to advance a very different vision for America. I'm here to tell you I'm not afraid to take them on.

You know I've spent my adult life going to bat for children, families, and our country.

And I do know how hard this job I'm seeking is. I have seen it up close and personal. You're not going to catch me wondering what it's like. Instead I'm spending my time planning for what I will do for you when I get there.

All our Presidents come into office looking so vigorous. Think about what they look like on inauguration day and then we watch them they grow grayer and grayer, and by the time they leave they're as white as the building they live in.

Well, let me tell you, I may not be the youngest candidate in this race. But I have one big advantage. I've been coloring my hair for years. So you're not going to see me turn white in the White House. And you're also not going to see me shrink from a fight. I think by now people know I don't quit.

So I hope you'll join me. I hope you'll help me build this campaign, make it your own. Tell your friends to go to hillaryclinton.com, sign up to volunteer.

This election is not about me. It's about us. And it has to be about what we will do together to restore faith, confidence and optimism in the future and the country we love.

I want to end with a story, some of you might remember we had a pretty vigorous campaign in 2008.

I vaguely recall. And both President Obama and I worked really hard and he won and I lost and then I went to work to make sure he'd win. And I was so relieved, I was just so relieved when finally November 2008 came around and he did.

And then a few days after the election, my husband and I were taking a walk in a little forested area near where we live, and his phone went off, and he answered it, and it was the president-elect, who said, "Bill, I need to talk to you, and I want to talk to Hillary." And Bill said, "Well, we're in the middle of a forest, but as soon as we get home we'll call." So we did, and the president-elect talked to Bill about the ideas he had and the cabinet and economic problems that he was all of a sudden being confronted with that he hadn't even been told about to the extent they were. So Bill talked to him and then hands me the phone, and the president-elect says, "I want you to come to Chicago to meet with me." And so I said, "Certainly, when would you like me to come?" And he says, "As soon as you can come." And I thought he wanted to talk to me about what I would do in the Senate to try to support what he was going to be championing as president.

So I went a few days later, go into this big office building and sit down with the president-elect, and he says to me, "I want you to be my secretary of state." And I said "Well, Mr. President-elect, I'm honored, I'm flattered, but there are so many other people," and I gave him names of people that I thought would have been great secretaries of state. And he says, "No, no, I have to spend all my time dealing with this economy, it's worse than we were even told, and yet we have all these problems around the world and I need somebody who I can send out there to go anywhere to talk to anyone, and I want it to be you." I said, "Well, I can't tell you how moved I am, but I have to go back to the Senate." And he said, "Now, I don't want to hear from you until you say yes." So I go back to the airport and get on the plane. I go back to New York and I'm thinking, you know, the right thing for me is to stay in the Senate, the people of New York had had a rough time. I became senator, and eight months later we had 9/11, and so I had spent most of my first term trying to help people and rebuild our city and protect it and everything and I just thought I needed to go back.

So I called the president-elect and said, "You know, again I cannot tell you how honored I am, and I will support you in any way I can, but I need to go back to the Senate, and so I must say no, Mr. President elect." He said, "I told you I didn't want to hear from you until you're ready to say yes." And so I say to my husband, you know, "Can you believe this? I mean the president-elect has asked me to be secretary of state, I told him no twice, and he says he's not going to give up until I say yes." Bill says, "Well as I remember it, I asked you to marry me twice before you said yes. He said you might stop and think that maybe there is a pattern here." So I stayed up all night ,and I thought, you know, suppose it had been reversed, and I had been fortunate enough to win, and I wanted somebody to be in my cabinet that I knew I could rely on and I had asked the president-elect. I would have wanted him to say yes, because the country was facing some very serious decisions. So I called him back the next day, and I said "OK, Mr. President, I am honored, I will be your secretary of state," and from that moment on we began to talk and to work together.

Fast forward to my first trip I go to Asia in February 2009, and I go because when I started calling presidents, prime ministers, and foreign ministers. They all said we didn't know what to expect because nobody's been paying a lot of attention to us. And I said well that is going to change, because the president and I see Asia as a very important priority, and I will come, so I was on my way.

One of the countries I was going to was Indonesia, and I agreed to do both the private meetings with the leaders and press conferences, the kinds of things you see on TV, and to do a lot of what's called public diplomacy, where we would reach out to people, and we would basically say, we care about you we're back we want to work with you. Let's try to find ways that we can be partners and send a different message.

So I agreed to go on this show in Jakarta called the "Awesome Show." And it was the early morning show, and it was unlike anything I've even seen on our TV, and you know you see anything on our TV these days, people are jumping up and down, they're singing, they're dancing, and I'm sitting here thinking, "Oh my gosh, I hope they don't ask me to sing or dance". But thankfully they didn't. They did an interview, and then they said the audience, "Does anybody have any questions?" So somebody raised a hand and was called on. So this person said, "I want to ask you something. We followed your election." I found that people overseas followed our election, in some ways closer than some Americans, really followed it, and so this questioner said, "We followed your election, it was really a hard, long-fought election" because as you know our elections last forever compared to most other countries which have elections. And he says, "We saw you and President Obama going at it, he was saying bad things about you, you were saying back things about him, and then all of a sudden you end up as his secretary of state? How does that work?" And I thought, you know this is a really serious question, because in lots of places you run against somebody, you can be exiled, imprisoned, or killed, not made Secretary of State, so I thought that there was a moment here that if I could rev my brain up that maybe could reach particularly young people because Indonesia is a relatively young democracy. So I said, "You're right, we ran a very hard campaign against each other. He won, I lost, and then I went to work for him because he and I shared many of the same positions about what should be done in the next presidency and then he won and then he asked me to be Secretary of State for the same reason, we both love our country."

And no matter how hard this election or any election becomes we should remember that at the core we can have disagreements, and we will, we have different governing philosophies, we have different views about what works, what the evidence shows works about economic policies, that's all fair game, but we should show more respect toward each other and we should remember why we're doing this, because we love our country, and we want it to be the country of hope and potential for our children and our grandchildren that many of us saw come into being over the last decades so as I run for President we're going to have some very difficult challenges. We'll have disagreements, we'll have debates, but I want you to know that I will be remembering what I think should be at the core of every political campaign, how we treat one another, and how we care for this gift we've been given, the United States of America. Thank you very much.

Wow! Thank you so very much. I cannot tell you how personally honored I am to be here with all of you, to be at this historic institution. Let me start by thanking President Rudley, everyone at Texas Southern university. It's a great treat to be here, to have heard just briefly from Dr. Rudley and others about the incredible programs and progress and the fact that you graduated more than 1,000 young people into the world not so many days ago. This institution is the living legacy, the absolute embodiment of Heman Marion Sweatt and the long struggle for civil rights. and for me, to be surrounded by so many here in Houston, Texas, and indeed from across our country, who were part of that movement is especially touching. I am delighted to be here with my friend, Sheila Jackson Lee, she has been a tireless champion for the people of the 18th District and state and the country.
I have to tell you though I thought she would tell you about the most important news coming out of Congress. And that is she is finally a member of the grandmother's club. And as a member of now a little over eight months, it is the best club you will ever be a member of, Sheila. I have to tell you I was excited to come here and to talk about an issue that is important to Barbara Jordan and should be important to all of us. But to do so in front of Dr. Freeman is a little daunting. I mean anyone who knows what this man has meant, not only to Barbara Jordan but to so many who have studied here who have been in anyway effected by his brilliant teaching, elocution and delivery would be a little daunted too. I noticed that both Dr. Rudley and Dr. Sheila both got off before Dr. Freeman came up.

I also want to say my thoughts and prayers are with all the families in Houston and across Texas affected by the recent terrible flooding. And I am confident that this community will embrace them. I remember very well coming here after Katrina with my husband, and in fact we decided to invite along a young Senator from Illinois by the name of Barack Obama, along and with Sheila and other leaders in the community. We toured the facilities that Houston had provided to those who were fleeing that horrific storm. And I saw how people had opened their hearts and their homes. This is a city that knows how to pull together, and I'm confident you'll do so again on behalf of those who are suffering from this latest terrible disaster.

And it is also a special moment to be here, knowing that Barbara Jordan was succeeded by Mickey Leland and the 18th District was so well represented for so long, and I am delighted to be here with Alison and to remember the pioneering work he did on behalf of children and the poor and hungry. So many issues that he was the champion of. And I want to thank Rosemary McGowan and all the friends and loved ones of Barbara Jordan here today. This is such a particular honor for me because the award is in memory of one of my true personal heroes—a woman who taught me and so many others the meaning of courage and determination in the pursuit of justice.

I first met Barbara Jordan when I was a young attorney and had been given a position working for the House of Representatives Judiciary Committee investigating Richard Nixon, and it was such a profound moment in American history. And there wasn't anyone who was a more effective eloquent inquisitor than Barbara Jordan.

As a 26-year-old fresh out of law school, as some of you are perhaps now having graduated from the Thurgood Marshall School here at TSU, I was riveted and not a little intimidated to tell you the truth by this unstoppable Congresswoman from Texas. I got to talk with her, which was thrilling, I got to hand her papers, which was equally exciting, but mostly I got to watch and listen to her.

At a time of shaken confidence, she stirred the entire nation with her words.

Remember what she said: "My faith in the Constitution is whole, it is complete; it is total."

It was that passion and moral clarity that took Barbara Jordan from the TSU and the halls of Texas legislature all the ways to the halls of Congress. The first woman and the first African American ever elected to represent Texas in the House of Representatives.

And she defended and continued the civil rights legacy of Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. and her friend and mentor President Lyndon Johnson—and in particular she was a staunch advocate for the Voting Rights Act, which had helped make it possible for her to be elected.

In 1975, in the face of fierce opposition, Barbara Jordan led the fight to extend the special protections of the Voting Rights Act to many more Americans, including Hispanic Americans, Native Americans, and Asian Americans as well.

And like every woman who has run for national office in this country in the last four decades, I stand here on the shoulders of Barbara Jordan and so does our entire country.

And boy do we miss her. We miss her courage, we also miss her humor, she was funny and most of all her irresistible voice.

I remember talking to her and Ann Richards one time. And between the two of them, forget trying to get a word in at all. And they were telling me about how they would love to go to the University of Texas women's basketball games. Right, and Barbara would be there by that time in her wheelchair, and Ann would be holding court right next to her. And Barbara would be yelling directions like she was, you know, the coach. "Why are you doing that? Jump higher! That's not a pass!" You know, all of those kinds of sideline comments. And so Ann was telling me this, with Barbara right there and I finally turned to her and said, "Barbara, encourage these young women, don't just criticize them." And Barbara turned around and said, "When they deserve it, I will."

We sure could use her irresistible voice. I wish we could hear that voice one more time.

Hear her express the outrage we feel about the fact that 40 years after Barbara Jordan fought to extend the Voting Rights Act, its heart has been ripped out.

And I wish we could hear her speak up for the student who has to wait for hours for his or her right to vote. For the grandmother who's turned away from the polls because her driver's license expired. For the father who's done his time and paid his debt to society but still hasn't gotten his rights back.

Now we know, unfortunately, Barbara isn't here to speak up for them and so many others. But we are. And we have a responsibility to say clearly and directly what's really going on in our country—because what is happening is a sweeping effort to disempower and disenfranchise people of color, poor people, and young people from one end of our country to the other.

Because since the Supreme Court eviscerated a key provision of the Voting Rights Act in 2013, many of the states that previously faced special scrutiny because of a history of racial discrimination have proposed and passed new laws that make it harder than ever to vote.

North Carolina passed a bill that went after pretty much anything that makes voting more convenient or more accessible. Early voting. Same-day registration. The ability of county election officials to even extend voting hours to accommodate long lines.

Now what possible reason could there be to end pre-registration for 16- and 17-year-olds and eliminate voter outreach in high schools?

We should be doing everything we can to get our young people more engaged in democracy, not less.

In fact I would say it is a cruel irony—but no coincidence—that Millennials, the most diverse, tolerant, and inclusive generation in American history, are now facing so much exclusion.

And we need look no further than right here in Texas. You all know this far better than I, but if you want to vote in this state, you can use a concealed weapon permit as a valid form of identification—but a valid student ID isn't good enough?

Now, Krystal Watson found out the hard way. She grew up in Louisiana but came to Marshall, Texas, to attend Wiley College. Krystal takes her responsibilities as a citizen so seriously that not only did she register to vote in Texas, where she was living and would be for a number of years, she even became a deputy registrar to help other people vote as well. But this past year, when she showed up at her local polling place with a Wiley College ID, she was turned away.

Experts estimate that hundreds of thousands of registered voters in Texas may face similar situations.

And while high-profile state laws like those in Texas and North Carolina get most of the attention, many of the worst offenses against the right to vote actually happen below the radar. Like when authorities shift poll locations and election dates. Or scrap language assistance for non-English speakers—something Barbara Jordan fought so hard for.

Without the pre-clearance provisions of the Voting Rights Act, no one outside the local community is likely to ever hear about these abuses, let alone have a chance to challenge them and end them.

It's not a surprise for you to hear that studies and everyday experiences confirm that minority voters are more likely than white voters to wait in long lines at the polls. They are also far more likely to vote in polling places with insufficient numbers of voting machines.

In South Carolina, for example, there's supposed to be one machine for every 250 voters. But in minority areas, that rule is just often overlooked. In Richland Country, nearly 90 percent of the precincts failed to meet the standard required by law in 2012. Instead of 250 voters per machine, in one precinct it was more than 430 voters per machine. Not surprisingly, people trying to cast a ballot there faced massive delays.

Now there are many fair-minded, well-intentioned election officials and state legislators all over this country. But this kind of disparity that I just mentioned does not happen by accident.

Now some of you may have heard me or my husband say one of our favorite sayings from Arkansas, of course I learned it from him. "You find a turtle on a fence post, it did not get there on its own." Well, all of these problems with voting did not just happen by accident. And it is just wrong, it's wrong to try to prevent, undermine, inhibit Americans' rights to vote. Its counter to the values we share. And at a time when so many Americans have lost trust in our political system, it's the opposite of what we should be doing in our country.

This is the greatest, longest-lasting democracy in the history of the world. We should be clearing the way for more people to vote, not putting up every roadblock anyone can imagine.

Yet unfortunately today, there are people who offer themselves to be leaders whose actions have undercut this fundamental American principle.

Here in Texas, former Governor Rick Perry signed a law that a federal court said was actually written with the purpose of discriminating against minority voters. He applauded when the Voting Rights Act was gutted, and said the lost protections were "outdated and unnecessary."

But Governor Perry is hardly alone in his crusade against voting rights.

In Wisconsin, Governor Scott Walker cut back early voting and signed legislation that would make it harder for college students to vote.

In New Jersey, Governor Christie vetoed legislation to extend early voting.

And in Florida, when Jeb Bush was governor, state authorities conducted a deeply flawed purge of voters before the presidential election in 2000.

Thankfully in 2004 a plan to purge even more voters was headed off.

So today, Republicans are systematically and deliberately trying to stop millions of American citizens from voting. What part of democracy are they afraid of?

I believe every citizen has the right to vote. And I believe we should do everything we can to make it easier for every citizen to vote.

I call on Republicans at all levels of government with all manner of ambition to stop fear mongering about a phantom epidemic of election fraud and start explaining why they're so scared of letting citizens have their say.

Yes, this is about democracy. But it's also about dignity. About the ability to stand up and say, yes, I am a citizen. I am an American. My voice counts. And no matter where you come from or what you look like or how much money you have, that means something. In fact, it means a lot.

I learned those lessons right here in Texas, registering voters in south Texas down in the valley in 1972.

Some of the people I met were, understandably, a little wary of a girl from Chicago who didn't speak a word of Spanish. But they wanted to vote. They were citizens. They knew they had a right to be heard. They wanted to exercise all the rights and responsibilities that citizenship conveys. That's what should matter because when those rights are denied to anyone, we're all the worse for it. It doesn't just hold back the aspirations of individual citizens. It holds back our entire country.

That's why, as a Senator, I championed a bill called the Count Every Vote Act. If it had become law, it would have made Election Day a federal holiday and mandated early voting opportunities. Deceiving voters, including by sending flyers into minority neighborhoods with false voting times and places, would have become a federal crime. And many Americans with criminal convictions who had paid their debts to society would have finally gotten their voting rights back.

Well today, with the damage to the Voting Rights Act so severe, the need for action is even more urgent.

First, Congress should move quickly to pass legislation to repair that damage and restore the full protections that American voters need and deserve.

I was in the Senate in 2006 when we voted 98 to zero to reauthorize the Voting Rights Act after an exhaustive review process.

There had been more than 20 hearings in the House and Senate Judiciary Committees. Testimony from expert witnesses. Investigative reports documenting continuing discrimination in covered jurisdictions. There were more than 15,000 pages of legislative record. Now that is how the system is supposed to work. You gather the evidence, you weigh it and you decide. And we did 98 to nothing. We put principle ahead of politics. That is what Congress needs to do again.

Second, we should implement the recommendations of the bipartisan presidential commission to improve voting. That commission was chaired by President Obama's campaign lawyer and by Governor Mitt Romney campaign's lawyer. And they actually agreed. And they set forth common sense reforms, including expanding early, absentee, and mail voting. Providing online voter registration. Establishing the principle that no one should ever have to wait more than 30 minutes to cast your vote.

Third, we should set a standard across our country of at least 20 days of early in-person voting everywhere—including opportunities for weekend and evening voting. If families coming out of church on Sunday before an election are inspired to go vote, they should be free to do just that. And we know that early in-person voting will reduce those long lines and give more citizens the chance to participate, especially those who have work or family obligations that make it difficult to get to the polls on Election Day.

It's not just convenient—it's also more secure, more reliable, and more affordable than absentee voting. So let's get this done.

And I believe we should go even further to strengthen voting rights in America. So today I am calling for universal, automatic voter registration. Every citizen, every state in the Union. Everyone, every young man or young woman should be automatically registered to vote when they turn 18—unless they actively choose to opt out. But I believe this would have a profound impact on our elections and our democracy. Between a quarter and a third of all eligible Americans remain unregistered and therefore unable to vote.

And we should modernize our entire approach to registration. The current system is a relic from an earlier age. It relies on a blizzard of paper records and it's full of errors.

We can do better. We can make sure that registration rolls are secure, up to date, and complete. When you move, your registration should move with you. If you are an eligible vote and want to be registered, you should be a registered voter—period.

Now, Oregon is already leading the way modernizing its system, and the rest of the country should follow. The technology is there. States have a lot of the data already. It's just a matter of syncing and streamlining.

Now, all of these reforms, from expanded early voting to modernized registration, are common sense ways to strengthen our democracy. But I'll be candid here, none of them will come easily.

It's going to take leadership at many levels.

Now more than ever, we need our citizens to actually get out and vote for people who want to hear what is on their minds.

We need more activists working to expose abuses, educate Americans about their rights, and hold authorities accountable for protecting them. Some of the worst provisions in recent laws have been blocked or delayed by tireless advocates raising the alarm and filing legal challenges. But they can't do it alone.

We need more grassroots mobilization efforts like the Moral Monday movement in North Carolina to build momentum for reform.

We need more Justices on the Supreme Court who will protect every citizen's right to vote, I mean the principle underlying our Constitution, which we had to fight for a long time to make apply to everybody, one person, one vote and we need a Supreme Court that cares more about protecting the right to vote of a person than the right to buy and election of a corporation.

But of course, you know what we really need? We need more elected leaders from Houston to Austin to Washington who will follow in the footsteps of Barbara Jordan and fight for the rights and opportunities of everyday Americans, not just those at the top of the ladder. And we need to remember that progress is built on common ground, not scorched earth.

You know, when I traveled around the world as your Secretary of State, one of the most frequent questions I was asked was, "How could you and President Obama work together after you fought so hard in that campaign?"

People were genuinely amazed, which I suppose is understandable, considering that in many places, when you lose an election or you oppose someone who wins you could get imprisoned or exiled—even killed—not hired as Secretary of State.

And it's true, I was surprised when the President asked me to serve. But he made that offer, and I accepted it, because we both love our country.

So my friends, here at this historic institution let us remember that America was built by people who knew that our common interest was more important than our self-interest. They were fearless in pursuit of a stronger, freer, and fairer nation.

As Barbara Jordan famously reminded us, when the Constitution was first written, it left most of us here out. But generations of Americans fought and marched and organized and prayed to expand the circle of freedom and opportunity. They never gave up and never backed down.

And nearly a century ago on this very day, after years of struggle, Congress finally passed the 19th amendment to give women the right to vote in the United States.

So that is, that is the story of progress, courageous men and women, expanding rights, not restricting them. And today we refuse, we refuse to allow our country or this generation of leaders to slow or reverse America's long march toward a more perfect union.

We owe it to our children and grandchildren to fight just as hard as those who came before us did. To march just as far. To organize just as well. To speak out just as loudly. And to vote, every chance we get for the kind of future we want.

That's what Barbara Jordan would do. That's what we should do in honor of her.

Thank you, and may God bless you.

Thank you! Oh, thank you all! Thank you so very, very much.
It is wonderful to be here with all of you.

To be in New York with my family, with so many friends, including many New Yorkers who gave me the honor of serving them in the Senate for eight years.

To be right across the water from the headquarters of the United Nations, where I represented our country many times.

To be here in this beautiful park dedicated to Franklin Roosevelt's enduring vision of America, the nation we want to be.

And in a place... with absolutely no ceilings.

You know, President Roosevelt's Four Freedoms are a testament to our nation's unmatched aspirations and a reminder of our unfinished work at home and abroad. His legacy lifted up a nation and inspired presidents who followed. One is the man I served as Secretary of State, Barack Obama, and another is my husband, Bill Clinton.

Two Democrats guided by the — Oh, that will make him so happy. They were and are two Democrats guided by the fundamental American belief that real and lasting prosperity must be built by all and shared by all.

President Roosevelt called on every American to do his or her part, and every American answered. He said there's no mystery about what it takes to build a strong and prosperous America: "Equality of opportunity... Jobs for those who can work... Security for those who need it... The ending of special privilege for the few... The preservation of civil liberties for all... a wider and constantly rising standard of living."

That still sounds good to me.

It's America's basic bargain. If you do your part you ought to be able to get ahead. And when everybody does their part, America gets ahead too.

That bargain inspired generations of families, including my own.

It's what kept my grandfather going to work in the same Scranton lace mill every day for 50 years.

It's what led my father to believe that if he scrimped and saved, his small business printing drapery fabric in Chicago could provide us with a middle-class life. And it did.

When President Clinton honored the bargain, we had the longest peacetime expansion in history, a balanced budget, and the first time in decades we all grew together, with the bottom 20 percent of workers increasing their incomes by the same percentage as the top 5 percent.

When President Obama honored the bargain, we pulled back from the brink of Depression, saved the auto industry, provided health care to 16 million working people, and replaced the jobs we lost faster than after a financial crash.

But, it's not 1941, or 1993, or even 2009. We face new challenges in our economy and our democracy.

We're still working our way back from a crisis that happened because time-tested values were replaced by false promises.

Instead of an economy built by every American, for every American, we were told that if we let those at the top pay lower taxes and bend the rules, their success would trickle down to everyone else.

What happened?

Well, instead of a balanced budget with surpluses that could have eventually paid off our national debt, the Republicans twice cut taxes for the wealthiest, borrowed money from other countries to pay for two wars, and family incomes dropped. You know where we ended up.

Except it wasn't the end.

As we have since our founding, Americans made a new beginning.

You worked extra shifts, took second jobs, postponed home repairs... you figured out how to make it work. And now people are beginning to think about their future again — going to college, starting a business, buying a house, finally being able to put away something for retirement.

So we're standing again. But, we all know we're not yet running the way America should.

You see corporations making record profits, with CEOs making record pay, but your paychecks have barely budged.

While many of you are working multiple jobs to make ends meet, you see the top 25 hedge fund managers making more than all of America's kindergarten teachers combined. And, often paying a lower tax rate.

So, you have to wonder: "When does my hard work pay off? When does my family get ahead?" "When?"

I say now.

Prosperity can't be just for CEOs and hedge fund managers.

Democracy can't be just for billionaires and corporations.

Prosperity and democracy are part of your basic bargain too.

You brought our country back.

Now it's time — your time to secure the gains and move ahead.

And, you know what?

America can't succeed unless you succeed.

That is why I am running for President of the United States.

Here, on Roosevelt Island, I believe we have a continuing rendezvous with destiny. Each American and the country we cherish.

I'm running to make our economy work for you and for every American.

For the successful and the struggling.

For the innovators and inventors.

For those breaking barriers in technology and discovering cures for diseases.

For the factory workers and food servers who stand on their feet all day.

For the nurses who work the night shift.

For the truckers who drive for hours and the farmers who feed us.

For the veterans who served our country.

For the small business owners who took a risk.

For everyone who's ever been knocked down, but refused to be knocked out.

I'm not running for some Americans, but for all Americans.

Our country's challenges didn't begin with the Great Recession and they won't end with the recovery.

For decades, Americans have been buffeted by powerful currents.

Advances in technology and the rise of global trade have created whole new areas of economic activity and opened new markets for our exports, but they have also displaced jobs and undercut wages for millions of Americans.

The financial industry and many multi-national corporations have created huge wealth for a few by focusing too much on short-term profit and too little on long-term value... too much on complex trading schemes and stock buybacks, too little on investments in new businesses, jobs, and fair compensation.

Our political system is so paralyzed by gridlock and dysfunction that most Americans have lost confidence that anything can actually get done. And they've lost trust in the ability of both government and Big Business to change course.

Now, we can blame historic forces beyond our control for some of this, but the choices we've made as a nation, leaders and citizens alike, have also played a big role.

Our next President must work with Congress and every other willing partner across our entire country. And I will do just that — to turn the tide so these currents start working for us more than against us.

At our best, that's what Americans do. We're problem solvers, not deniers. We don't hide from change, we harness it.

But we can't do that if we go back to the top-down economic policies that failed us before.

Americans have come too far to see our progress ripped away.

Now, there may be some new voices in the presidential Republican choir, but they're all singing the same old song...

A song called "Yesterday."

You know the one — all our troubles look as though they're here to stay... and we need a place to hide away... They believe in yesterday.

And you're lucky I didn't try singing that, too, I'll tell you!

These Republicans trip over themselves promising lower taxes for the wealthy and fewer rules for the biggest corporations without regard for how that will make income inequality even worse.

We've heard this tune before. And we know how it turns out.

Ask many of these candidates about climate change, one of the defining threats of our time, and they'll say: "I'm not a scientist." Well, then, why don't they start listening to those who are?

They pledge to wipe out tough rules on Wall Street, rather than rein in the banks that are still too risky, courting future failures. In a case that can only be considered mass amnesia.

They want to take away health insurance from more than 16 million Americans without offering any credible alternative.

They shame and blame women, rather than respect our right to make our own reproductive health decisions.

They want to put immigrants, who work hard and pay taxes, at risk of deportation.

And they turn their backs on gay people who love each other.

Fundamentally, they reject what it takes to build an inclusive economy. It takes an inclusive society. What I once called "a village" that has a place for everyone.

Now, my values and a lifetime of experiences have given me a different vision for America.

I believe that success isn't measured by how much the wealthiest Americans have, but by how many children climb out of poverty...

How many start-ups and small businesses open and thrive...

How many young people go to college without drowning in debt...

How many people find a good job...

How many families get ahead and stay ahead.

I didn't learn this from politics. I learned it from my own family.

My mother taught me that everybody needs a chance and a champion. She knew what it was like not to have either one.

Her own parents abandoned her, and by 14 she was out on her own, working as a housemaid. Years later, when I was old enough to understand, I asked what kept her going.

You know what her answer was? Something very simple: Kindness from someone who believed she mattered.

The 1st grade teacher who saw she had nothing to eat at lunch and, without embarrassing her, brought extra food to share.

The woman whose house she cleaned letting her go to high school so long as her work got done. That was a bargain she leapt to accept.

And, because some people believed in her, she believed in me.

That's why I believe with all my heart in America and in the potential of every American.

To meet every challenge.

To be resilient... no matter what the world throws at you.

To solve the toughest problems.

I believe we can do all these things because I've seen it happen.

As a young girl, I signed up at my Methodist Church to babysit the children of Mexican farmworkers, while their parents worked in the fields on the weekends. And later, as a law student, I advocated for Congress to require better working and living conditions for farm workers whose children deserved better opportunities.

My first job out of law school was for the Children's Defense Fund. I walked door-to-door to find out how many children with disabilities couldn't go to school, and to help build the case for a law guaranteeing them access to education.

As a leader of the Legal Services Corporation, I defended the right of poor people to have a lawyer. And saw lives changed because an abusive marriage ended or an illegal eviction stopped.

In Arkansas, I supervised law students who represented clients in courts and prisons, organized scholarships for single parents going to college, led efforts for better schools and health care, and personally knew the people whose lives were improved.

As Senator, I had the honor of representing brave firefighters, police officers, EMTs, construction workers, and volunteers who ran toward danger on 9/11 and stayed there, becoming sick themselves.

It took years of effort, but Congress finally approved the health care they needed.

There are so many faces and stories that I carry with me of people who gave their best and then needed help themselves.

Just weeks ago, I met another person like that, a single mom juggling a job and classes at community college, while raising three kids.

She doesn't expect anything to come easy. But she did ask me: What more can be done so it isn't quite so hard for families like hers?

I want to be her champion and your champion.

If you'll give me the chance, I'll wage and win Four Fights for you.

The first is to make the economy work for everyday Americans, not just those at the top.

To make the middle class mean something again, with rising incomes and broader horizons. And to give the poor a chance to work their way into it.

The middle class needs more growth and more fairness. Growth and fairness go together. For lasting prosperity, you can't have one without the other.

Is this possible in today's world?

I believe it is or I wouldn't be standing here.

Do I think it will be easy? Of course not.

But, here's the good news: There are allies for change everywhere who know we can't stand by while inequality increases, wages stagnate, and the promise of America dims. We should welcome the support of all Americans who want to go forward together with us.

There are public officials who know Americans need a better deal.

Business leaders who want higher pay for employees, equal pay for women and no discrimination against the LGBT community either.

There are leaders of finance who want less short-term trading and more long-term investing.

There are union leaders who are investing their own pension funds in putting people to work to build tomorrow's economy. We need everyone to come to the table and work with us.

In the coming weeks, I'll propose specific policies to:

Reward businesses who invest in long term value rather than the quick buck — because that leads to higher growth for the economy, higher wages for workers, and yes, bigger profits, everybody will have a better time.

I will rewrite the tax code so it rewards hard work and investments here at home, not quick trades or stashing profits overseas.

I will give new incentives to companies that give their employees a fair share of the profits their hard work earns.

We will unleash a new generation of entrepreneurs and small business owners by providing tax relief, cutting red tape, and making it easier to get a small business loan.

We will restore America to the cutting edge of innovation, science, and research by increasing both public and private investments.

And we will make America the clean energy superpower of the 21st century.

Developing renewable power — wind, solar, advanced biofuels...

Building cleaner power plants, smarter electric grids, greener buildings...

Using additional fees and royalties from fossil fuel extraction to protect the environment...

And ease the transition for distressed communities to a more diverse and sustainable economic future from coal country to Indian country, from small towns in the Mississippi Delta to the Rio Grande Valley to our inner cities, we have to help our fellow Americans.

Now, this will create millions of jobs and countless new businesses, and enable America to lead the global fight against climate change.

We will also connect workers to their jobs and businesses. Customers will have a better chance to actually get where they need and get what they desire with roads, railways, bridges, airports, ports, and broadband brought up to global standards for the 21st century.

We will establish an infrastructure bank and sell bonds to pay for some of these improvements.

Now, building an economy for tomorrow also requires investing in our most important asset, our people, beginning with our youngest.

That's why I will propose that we make preschool and quality childcare available to every child in America.

And I want you to remember this, because to me, this is absolutely the most-compelling argument why we should do this. Research tells us how much early learning in the first five years of life can impact lifelong success. In fact, 80 percent of the brain is developed by age three.

One thing I've learned is that talent is universal — you can find it anywhere — but opportunity is not. Too many of our kids never have the chance to learn and thrive as they should and as we need them to.

Our country won't be competitive or fair if we don't help more families give their kids the best possible start in life.

So let's staff our primary and secondary schools with teachers who are second to none in the world, and receive the respect they deserve for sparking the love of learning in every child.

Let's make college affordable and available to all ...and lift the crushing burden of student debt.

Let's provide lifelong learning for workers to gain or improve skills the economy requires, setting up many more Americans for success.

Now, the second fight is to strengthen America's families, because when our families are strong, America is strong.

And today's families face new and unique pressures. Parents need more support and flexibility to do their job at work and at home.

I believe you should have the right to earn paid sick days.

I believe you should receive your work schedule with enough notice to arrange childcare or take college courses to get ahead.

I believe you should look forward to retirement with confidence, not anxiety.

That you should have the peace of mind that your health care will be there when you need it, without breaking the bank.

I believe we should offer paid family leave so no one has to choose between keeping a paycheck and caring for a new baby or a sick relative.

And it is way past time to end the outrage of so many women still earning less than men on the job — and women of color often making even less.

This isn't a women's issue. It's a family issue. Just like raising the minimum wage is a family issue. Expanding childcare is a family issue. Declining marriage rates is a family issue. The unequal rates of incarceration is a family issue. Helping more people with an addiction or a mental health problem get help is a family issue.

In America, every family should feel like they belong.

So we should offer hard-working, law-abiding immigrant families a path to citizenship. Not second-class status.

And, we should ban discrimination against LGBT Americans and their families so they can live, learn, marry, and work just like everybody else.

You know, America's diversity, our openness, our devotion to human rights and freedom is what's drawn so many to our shores. What's inspired people all over the world. I know. I've seen it with my own eyes.

And these are also qualities that prepare us well for the demands of a world that is more interconnected than ever before.

So we have a third fight: to harness all of America's power, smarts, and values to maintain our leadership for peace, security, and prosperity.

No other country on Earth is better positioned to thrive in the 21st century. No other country is better equipped to meet traditional threats from countries like Russia, North Korea, and Iran — and to deal with the rise of new powers like China.

No other country is better prepared to meet emerging threats from cyber attacks, transnational terror networks like ISIS, and diseases that spread across oceans and continents.

As your President, I'll do whatever it takes to keep Americans safe.

And if you look over my left shoulder you can see the new World Trade Center soaring skyward.

As a Senator from New York, I dedicated myself to getting our city and state the help we needed to recover. And as a member of the Armed Services Committee, I worked to maintain the best-trained, best-equipped, strongest military, ready for today's threats and tomorrow's.

And when our brave men and women come home from war or finish their service, I'll see to it that they get not just the thanks of a grateful nation, but the care and benefits they've earned.

I've stood up to adversaries like Putin and reinforced allies like Israel. I was in the Situation Room on the day we got bin Laden.

But, I know — I know we have to be smart as well as strong.

Meeting today's global challenges requires every element of America's power, including skillful diplomacy, economic influence, and building partnerships to improve lives around the world with people, not just their governments.

There are a lot of trouble spots in the world, but there's a lot of good news out there too.

I believe the future holds far more opportunities than threats if we exercise creative and confident leadership that enables us to shape global events rather than be shaped by them.

And we all know that in order to be strong in the world, though, we first have to be strong at home. That's why we have to win the fourth fight — reforming our government and revitalizing our democracy so that it works for everyday Americans.

We have to stop the endless flow of secret, unaccountable money that is distorting our elections, corrupting our political process, and drowning out the voices of our people.

We need Justices on the Supreme Court who will protect every citizen's right to vote, rather than every corporation's right to buy elections.

If necessary, I will support a constitutional amendment to undo the Supreme Court's decision in Citizens United.

I want to make it easier for every citizen to vote. That's why I've proposed universal, automatic registration and expanded early voting.

I'll fight back against Republican efforts to disempower and disenfranchise young people, poor people, people with disabilities, and people of color.

What part of democracy are they afraid of?

No matter how easy we make it to vote, we still have to give Americans something worth voting for.

Government is never going to have all the answers — but it has to be smarter, simpler, more efficient, and a better partner.

That means access to advanced technology so government agencies can more effectively serve their customers, the American people.

We need expertise and innovation from the private sector to help cut waste and streamline services.

There's so much that works in America. For every problem we face, someone somewhere in America is solving it. Silicon Valley cracked the code on sharing and scaling a while ago. Many states are pioneering new ways to deliver services. I want to help Washington catch up.

To do that, we need a political system that produces results by solving problems that hold us back, not one overwhelmed by extreme partisanship and inflexibility.

Now, I'll always seek common ground with friend and opponent alike. But I'll also stand my ground when I must.

That's something I did as Senator and Secretary of State — whether it was working with Republicans to expand health care for children and for our National Guard, or improve our foster care and adoption system, or pass a treaty to reduce the number of Russian nuclear warheads that could threaten our cities — and it's something I will always do as your President.

We Americans may differ, bicker, stumble, and fall; but we are at our best when we pick each other up, when we have each other's back.

Like any family, our American family is strongest when we cherish what we have in common, and fight back against those who would drive us apart.

People all over the world have asked me: "How could you and President Obama work together after you fought so hard against each other in that long campaign?"

Now, that is an understandable question considering that in many places, if you lose an election you could get imprisoned or exiled — even killed — not hired as Secretary of State.

But President Obama asked me to serve, and I accepted because we both love our country. That's how we do it in America.

With that same spirit, together, we can win these four fights.

We can build an economy where hard work is rewarded.

We can strengthen our families.

We can defend our country and increase our opportunities all over the world.

And we can renew the promise of our democracy.

If we all do our part. In our families, in our businesses, unions, houses of worship, schools, and, yes, in the voting booth.

I want you to join me in this effort. Help me build this campaign and make it your own.

Talk to your friends, your family, your neighbors.

Text "JOIN" to 4-7-2-4-6.

Go to hillaryclinton.com and sign up to make calls and knock on doors.

It's no secret that we're going up against some pretty powerful forces that will do and spend whatever it takes to advance a very different vision for America. But I've spent my life fighting for children, families, and our country. And I'm not stopping now.

You know, I know how hard this job is. I've seen it up close and personal.

All our Presidents come into office looking so vigorous. And then we watch their hair grow grayer and grayer.

Well, I may not be the youngest candidate in this race. But I will be the youngest woman President in the history of the United States!

And the first grandmother as well.

And one additional advantage: You're won't see my hair turn white in the White House. I've been coloring it for years!

So I'm looking forward to a great debate among Democrats, Republicans, and Independents. I'm not running to be a President only for those Americans who already agree with me. I want to be a President for all Americans.

And along the way, I'll just let you in on this little secret. I won't get everything right. Lord knows I've made my share of mistakes. Well, there's no shortage of people pointing them out!

And I certainly haven't won every battle I've fought. But leadership means perseverance and hard choices. You have to push through the setbacks and disappointments and keep at it.

I think you know by now that I've been called many things by many people — "quitter" is not one of them.

Like so much else in my life, I got this from my mother.

When I was a girl, she never let me back down from any bully or barrier. In her later years, Mom lived with us, and she was still teaching me the same lessons. I'd come home from a hard day at the Senate or the State Department, sit down with her at the small table in our breakfast nook, and just let everything pour out. And she would remind me why we keep fighting, even when the odds are long and the opposition is fierce.

I can still hear her saying: "Life's not about what happens to you, it's about what you do with what happens to you — so get back out there."

She lived to be 92 years old, and I often think about all the battles she witnessed over the course of the last century — all the progress that was won because Americans refused to give up or back down.

She was born on June 4, 1919 — before women in America had the right to vote. But on that very day, after years of struggle, Congress passed the Constitutional Amendment that would change that forever.

The story of America is a story of hard-fought, hard-won progress. And it continues today. New chapters are being written by men and women who believe that all of us — not just some, but all — should have the chance to live up to our God-given potential.

Not only because we're a tolerant country, or a generous country, or a compassionate country, but because we're a better, stronger, more prosperous country when we harness the talent, hard work, and ingenuity of every single American.

I wish my mother could have been with us longer. I wish she could have seen Chelsea become a mother herself. I wish she could have met Charlotte.

I wish she could have seen the America we're going to build together.

An America, where if you do your part, you reap the rewards.

Where we don't leave anyone out, or anyone behind.

An America where a father can tell his daughter: yes, you can be anything you want to be. Even President of the United States.

Thank you all. God bless you. And may God bless America.

Thank you so much. 
Thank you. Oh, I am thrilled to be here, and to be in such a beautiful facility, having just had the chance to spend a little time with some children, mostly 4-year-olds, but a few 5-year-olds. It was great.

And I thank Julie and the entire team here at the Y. I am such a big believer in this kind of partnership, and I was thrilled, as Julie was talking about it, to see the applause break out on behalf of this YMCA and all that it does.

This is, for me, a very important place to be to talk about a really critical issue, one that, as Julie has said, I have spent much of my adult life being committed to and concerned about, and I can't think of a better place to do this than here in New Hampshire, a state that will always have a special place in my heart. [laughter] 

And so, I had a great event Saturday in a perfect place on a perfect day, on Roosevelt Island in New York City at the Four Freedoms park that was constructed in honor of President Roosevelt. And I was able to talk about the four fights that I want to wage and win on behalf of the American people.

They, to me, really encapsulate what my campaign is about, but also what our country needs to do together, build an economy for tomorrow, not yesterday; strengthen America's families, because when our families are strong, America is strong; harness all of our power, not just the military but diplomatic and economic to use our values to lead the world; and to revitalize our democracy here at home, particularly by focusing on getting dark, unaccountable money out of politics, even if it takes a constitutional amendment. 

And I will be rolling out specific policies over the weeks to come, but I do believe with all my heart that everything we need to do in our country really starts with how we treat our children and how we try to raise them, taking care of their needs, being able to stimulate them, to give them a better chance in life, helping them become successful and good citizens.

And, for me, all of this does come back to our kids. And that's because my mother, who was with me in New Hampshire in 2008, really taught me that everybody needs a chance and everybody needs a champion. And for... 

For her, she knew what it was like not to have either when she was growing up, because she was abandoned very young by her parents and sent to live with grandparents who didn't want her, so that by the time she was 14, she was out on her own, working as a house maid and a babysitter, in another family's home.

And I didn't know any of this when I was growing up. When I was the age of the kids we were reading "The Very Hungry Caterpillar" to, I just knew she was my mom. And she was great and she was fun, and she taught me so much. And she made grilled cheese and tomato soup sandwiches. I mean, there was just a wonderful sense of being loved and taken care of, but also being inspired.

And I remember asking her when I got old enough to kind of piece together some of the answers to questions I was getting about her childhood, how could she do this?

And her answer was very simple, you know, kindness along the way from people that cared about her and showed her she mattered. The first-grade teacher who saw she had nothing to eat for lunch, and without embarrassing here, started bringing extra food, and then would lean over and whisper, "Dorothy, I brought too much food today. Would you like some? I can't eat it all."

Or even the woman whose house she went to work in, she wanted so much to go to high school, but she knew she had to do the chores that were necessary. And so the woman said, "Well, if you can get your chores done, you can go to high school." And that was a great gift that my mother was forever grateful for.

Because those people believed in her, she believed in me. You know, there is a direct link. If we believe in our children, we instill in them the belief that they are worth something. And then they, in turn, can pass that on.

Now, ideally we all hope that families can do that. But in today's world, it's really hard for many families to do everything they're expected to do under the stresses that they face. Because of her, I believe in the potential of every American, and particularly every American child. And when our children succeed, America succeeds.

So, I've been a champion for early childhood education for as long as I can remember, really starting when I was in law school and got interested in, as I was studying the law, why do some people follow the law and other people don't. What's—what's in their background? What makes them either a productive member of society or somebody on the outside who may be trying to tear down instead of build up?

And that's why I'm putting this front and center in my campaign, because I think it's time we realized once and for all that investing in our children is one of the best investments our country can make. 

Now, I think most of us kind of intuitively have known that. But now research is telling us how much early learning in the first five years of life can impact life-long success. So we have to help parents be their children's first teachers, from that very first day. And we have to help them get access to quality, affordable childcare and preschool.

And for me, it's recognizing the reality of today's families: 40 percent of the breadwinners, the principle breadwinners in America today are women. We have a lot of single moms heroically trying to raise kids under sometimes very challenging circumstances. We have a lot of two-parent families where people are working night shifts. They're overlapping. They are just doing everything they can sometimes with multiple jobs to keep body and soul together and put that food on the table and that roof over their head.

Today's parents have to juggle so much. They have to squeeze every minute out of every 24-hour day. And that just makes the argument even stronger as to why we have to have their backs. We have to be there to help them do the best job they can possibly do.

Yes, they need to do the job that pays them. But at the end of the day, the job raising children, taking care of your family, caring even for your parents as they age, is the most important job any of us will ever do. And we don't do it for pay. We do it for love. We do it for a sense of giving back. But let's try to figure out how to make it a little bit easier.

You know, I met a woman... 

You know, I met a woman a few weeks—a couple weeks ago who was trying to do everything she could imagine to make it work. She was a single mom. She's raising three kids. She was working, and she was going to community college, because she was trying to get ahead so that she could get a better job.

She said, "You know, I don't ask for anything, but why does it have to be so hard"? I hear that question all over. "Why does it have to be so hard"?

It's hard enough to pay for any preschool or childcare at all, let alone the quality programs that help kids develop and flourish. Funding for these opportunities has not kept up with changing times and rising demand. So it's no surprise that out-of-pocket childcare costs for families have soared by nearly 25 percent the past decade.

In many states, it costs more for childcare of quality than it costs for college tuition, and we know what's happened at that end of the learning curve.

We actually did make a lot of progress expanding preschool attendance for 3-and 4-year-olds during the 1990s. I was honored to hold the first ever White House conference on early childhood development to bring together people, like those you see here. 

But starting in 2001, there's been almost no progress. Only 55 percent of all of America's 3-and 4-year-olds are enrolled in preschool, and meanwhile, many of our economic competitors are racing ahead. They are making big investments in preschool and early education.

I'll tell you a little story. You know, I spent a lot of time as secretary of state trying to figure out how we were going to deal with the rise of China. It's going to be one of the biggest problems for the next president. And there're a lot of aspects to it.

But I was not surprised to get a call about two years ago shortly, after I left the State Department, on behalf of the highest-ranking woman in the Chinese government. And she was coming to Washington, and I had worked with her as secretary of state, and she asked if she could see me, and I said, "Of course. I'd be happy to see her."

And then she said, "You know, could you do an event with me about early childhood"? I said, "Oh, certainly. What is it about early childhood that has you so interested"?

Here's what she said, and then we did the event. We did the event at the Brookings Institute in Washington.

China's making a huge commitment to early childhood and to pre-kindergarten. Why? They look at the same brain research.

In fact, they have asked the American Nobel Prize-winning economist from the University of Chicago, hardly a hotbed of radical liberalism... [laughter] ... to be their consultant, among others, because he did the study, which proved that early-childhood investing by a country is one of the best returns on investment that we can make. So the Chinese are using an American expert for that. 

Though, if I hadn't been excited before, I got really motivated about this. But unfortunately, we're hearing something different from Republican leaders in Washington.

Republicans aren't just missing the boat on early-childhood education; they're trying to sink it. Their budget puts at risk on the most effective investments for our youngest children, Early Head Start.

Did they cut subsidies to oil companies? No. Did they cut tax loopholes, like carried interest for hedge-fund managers? No.

The Republicans took care of those at the top and went after the kids.

Now I believe getting off to a good start should be our children's birthright, part of the basic bargain that we have with each other as a nation.

Every child should have the tools and the skills to thrive in tomorrow's economy, especially those kids from our most vulnerable and at-risk communities. And we need to make sure that parents can get good jobs and stay in the workforce. That drives the economic engine. So we have to do more to help them deal with the most difficult of the decisions of parents for young children to stay in the workforce.

I believe the time has come to make pre-school and quality child care available to every child in America. If our families are going to be strong and our economy is going to thrive, all our kids need the chance to get off to the best possible start. 

I will I will work with states and communities across America to make sure that in the next 10 years, every four-year-old in America has access to high-quality pre-school. Now already governors and state legislatures across the country are discovering the value of pre-school and this is bipartisan.

You know, one of the states with a universal pre-K program in America is Oklahoma—about as red a state as you can get. But they have figured it out, the government and business leaders and families alike that this is a smart investment for them. And we have to build on the momentum started by the states. Now look how far here in New Hampshire you've come.

Nearly 20 years ago, back when Senator Jeanne Shaheen was Governor Shaheen, she delivered funding for public kindergarten for the first time in the state's history. 

That then allowed the conversation to move where it is today with Governor Maggie Hassan supporting efforts for full-day kindergarten and innovative pre-K partnerships. So you start and get what you...  ... have achieved on kindergarten. Then you move toward full day and then innovative pre-K.

All across the country we need to be doing that. And we also need to invest in child care because, if you only start at four, the brain research shows that 80 percent of your brain has developed by the age of three. Now the good news is that leaves 20 percent to keep working on. [laughter]

But it is a fact that, by three, many of our kids have already had most of the brain development that they're going to get. And in this campaign, I'll offer a comprehensive agenda to ensure that every child in America has access to quality affordable child care. 

I will propose a middle-class tax cut to help parents deal with rising child care costs. 

And I'll lead an effort to expand child care opportunities and to make sure that programs address both the needs of working parents and the needs of children.

We shouldn't think of child care as just a place to deposit your kids, a warehouse. We should invest in programs that create health environments for early learning and to make sure that parents get the support they need from the time their children are infants. I will double the Early Head Start Child Care Partnership Grant Program, which brings Head Start's evidenced-based curriculum into the child care setting to provide comprehensive, full-day, high-quality services to low-income families. And I will double our investment in Early Head Start itself, a program I helped to create when I was first lady. And we know... 

We know it's making a difference, because we actually have evidence that shows it's making a difference.

And this is part, as I said, of a long-term commitment of mine, going back to my Methodist Church, where I was—I was raised, and babysitting, you know, children of Mexican migrant farmworkers, through my years at the Children's Defense Fund, working to expand opportunities for kids with disabilities, and through my time in the White House with my husband and in the Senate in New York and even as secretary of state, because I have learned that talent is universal, but opportunity is not. And I look sometimes... 

I look sometimes in the eyes of kids who've had a really tough set of obstacles to overcome, and they're doing the best they can. And we need to do what we can to help them succeed.

But every baby comes into this world with so much God-given potential. And when they leave the hospital, some will have great opportunity their family can give them, and others will struggle.

Now, as you may have heard, I am a new grandmother. And so, for me...  ... this has become really personal. I remember being in the hospital waiting for Charlotte's arrival and talking to the nurses there. And what did they want to talk to me about? They wanted to talk to me about how hard it was for them, plus a lot of their patients, to get childcare. How it was especially hard when they had to work the night shift. How they has to keep juggling everything, all the time. And it was here, at one of the great moments in my life, a reminder that there are so many hardworking, conscientious people, who deserve more help than they're getting right now.

And it needs to be a partnership, just like this Y is a partnership. You know, a partnership between the public and private interests. A partnership where people feel that they can contribute and participate.

I think if we come together and take this on as a true national mission, we can unlock the potential of all our children and further the potential of our country.

And our country then will be more inclusive, not leaving people behind and out, and where a father can tell his daughter, "You can grow up to be anything you want, including president of the United States." 

Thank you. Thank you so much. Thank you very much, President Van Zant, and thanks to everyone at the New School for welcoming us today. I'm delighted to be back.
You know, over the past few months, I have had the opportunity to listen to Americans' concerns about an economy that still isn't delivering for them. It's not delivering the way that it should. It still seems, to most Americans that I have spoken with, that it is stacked for those at the top.

But I've also heard about the hopes that people have for their future—going to college without drowning in debt; starting that small business they've always dreamed about; getting a job that pays well enough to support a family and provide for a secure retirement.

Previous generations of Americans built the greatest economy and strongest middle class the world has ever known on the promise of a basic bargain: if you work hard and do your part, you should be able to get ahead. And when you get ahead, America gets ahead. But over the past several decades, that bargain has eroded. Our job is to make it strong again.

For 35 years, Republicans have argued that if we give more wealth to those at top by cutting their taxes and letting big corporations write their own rules, it will trickle down, it will trickle down to everyone else. Yet every time they have a chance to try that approach, it explodes the national debt, concentrates wealth even more and does practically nothing to help hard-working Americans.

Twice now in the past 20 years, a Democratic president has had to come in and clean up the mess left behind. 

I think the results speak for themselves. Under President Clinton—I like the sound of that—America saw the longest peacetime expansion in our history. 

Nearly 23 million jobs, a balanced budget and a surplus for the future, and most importantly, incomes rose across the board, not just for those already at the top. Eight years later, President Obama and the American people's hard work pulled us back from the brink of depression. President Obama saved the auto industry, imposed new rules on Wall Street and provided health care to 16 million Americans. 

Now today—today, as the shadow of crisis recedes and longer-term challenges come into focus, I believe we have to build a growth and fairness economy. You can't have one without the other.  We can't create enough jobs and new businesses without more growth, and we can't build strong families and support our consumer economy without more fairness. We need both.

Because while America standing again, we are not yet running the way we should. Corporate profits are at near record highs and Americans are working as hard as ever. But paychecks had nearly budged in real terms. Families today are stretched in so many directions, and so are their budgets. Out of pocket costs of health care, child care, hearing for aging parents, are rising a lot faster than wages.

I hear this everywhere I go. A single mom talked about juggling a job and classes at community college while raising three kids. She doesn't expect anything to come easy. But if she got a raise, everything would not be quite so hard.

The grandmother who works around the clock providing child care to other people's kids. She's proud of her work, but the pay is fairly enough to live on, especially with the soaring price of her prescription drugs.

The young entrepreneur whose dream of buying a bowling alley where he worked as a teenager was nearly derailed by his student debt. If he can grow his business, he can pay off his debt and pay his employees, including himself, more, too.

Millions of hardworking Americans tell similar stories. Wages need to rise to keep up with cost, paychecks need to grow. Families who work hard and do their part deserve to get ahead and stay ahead. The defining economic challenge of our time clear. We must raise incomes for hard-working Americans, so they can afford a middle-class life. We must drive steady income growth that lifts up families, and lifts up our country. And that... 

And that will be my mission, from the first day I am president to the last. I... 

I will get up every day thinking about the families of America, like the family I came from, with a hard-working dad who started a small business and scrimped, and saved, and gave us a good middle-class life. I will be thinking about all the people that I represented in New York and the stories that they told me, and that I worked with them to improve. I will, as your president take on this challenge against the backdrop of major changes in our economy and the global economy that did not start with the Recession and will not end with the recovery.

You know, advances in technology and expanding global trade have created new areas of commercial activity and opened new markets for our exports. Too often they are polarizing our economy, benefiting high skilled workers, but displacing and downgrading blue-collar jobs and other mid-level jobs that used to provide solid incomes for millions of Americans.

Today's marketplace focuses too much on the short-term, like second to second financial trading, and quarterly earnings reports, and too little on long-term investments. Meanwhile, many Americans are making extra money renting out a small room, designing websites, selling products they design themselves at home, or even driving their own car. This on-demand, or so-called gig economy is creating exciting economies and unleashing innovation.

But it is also raising hard questions about work-place protections and what a good job will look like in the future.

So, all of these trends are real and none, none is going away. But they do not determine our destiny. The choices we make as a nation matter.  And the choices we make in the years ahead will set the stage for what American life in the middle class and our economy will be like in this century.

As president, I will work with every possible partner to turn the tide to make these currents of change start working for us more than against us, to strengthen, not hollow out, the American middle class. Because I think at our best, that's what Americans do. We are problem solvers, not deniers. We don't hide from change; we harness it.

The measure of our success must be how much incomes rise for hardworking families, not just for successful CEOs and money managers and not some just arbitrary growth targets untethered to people's lives and livelihoods. 

I want to see our economy work for the struggling, the striving and the successful. We're not going to find all the answers we need today in the playbooks of the past, we can't go back to the old policies that failed us before, nor can we just replay the successes.

Today is not 1993. It's not 2009. So we need solutions for the big challenges we face now.

So today, I'm proposing an agenda to raise incomes for hardworking Americans, an agenda for strong growth, fair growth and long-term growth.

Let me begin with strong growth. More growth means more jobs and more new businesses. More jobs give people choices about where to work.

And employers have to offer higher wages and better benefits in order to compete with each other to hire new workers and keep the productive ones. That's why economists tell us that getting closer to full employment is crucial for raising incomes.

Small businesses create more than 60 percent of new American jobs on net, so they have to be a top priority. I've said I want to be the small-business president, and I mean it. And throughout this campaign, I'm going to be talking about how we empower entrepreneurs with less red tape, easier access to capital, tax relief and simplification.

I'll also push for broader business tax reform to spur investment in America, closing those loopholes that reward companies for sending jobs and profits overseas. 

And I know it's not always how we think about this, but another engine of strong growth should be comprehensive immigration reform. 

I want you to hear this. Bringing millions of hardworking people into the formal economy would increase our gross domestic product by an estimated $700 billion over 10 years. 

Then there are the new public investments that will help establish businesses and entrepreneurs, create the next generation of high-paying jobs.

You know, when we get Americans moving, we get our country moving. So let's establish an infrastructure bank that can channel more public and private funds...  ... channel those funds to finance world-class airports, railways, roads, bridges and ports. 

And let's built those faster broadband networks and make sure there's a greater diversity of providers so consumers have more choice. 

And really, there's no excuse not to make greater investments in cleaner renewable energy right now. 

Our economy obviously runs on energy, and the time has come to make America the clean-energy superpower.  I advocate that because these investments will create millions of jobs, save us money in the long run and help us meet the threats of climate change.

And let's fund the scientific and medical research that spawns innovative companies and creates entire new industries, just as the project to sequence the human genome did in the 1990s and President Obama's initiatives on precision medicine and brain research will do in the coming years.

I will set ambitious goals in all of these areas in the months ahead.

But today, let me emphasize another key ingredient of strong growth that often goes overlooked and undervalued: breaking down barriers so more Americans participate more fully in the workforce, especially women. 

We are in a global competition, as I'm sure you have noticed. And we cant afford to leave talent on the sidelines. But that's exactly what we're doing today. When we leave people out or write them off, we not only shortchange them and their dreams, we shortchange our country and our future.

The movement of women into the American workforce over the past 40 years was responsible for more than $3.5 trillion in economic growth. But that progress has stalled.

The United States used to rank 7th out of 24 advanced countries in women's labor force participation. By 2013, we had dropped to 19th. That represents a lot of unused potential for our economy and for American families.

Studies show that nearly a third of this decline relative to other countries is because they're expanding family-friendly policies like paid leave and we are not.

We should be making it easier for Americans to be both good workers and good parents and caregivers. Women who want to work should be able to do so without worrying every day about how they're going to take care of their children or what will happen if a family member gets sick.

You know, last year—  —last year while I was at the hospital here in Manhattan, waiting for little Charlotte to make her grand entrance, one of the nurses said, thank you for fighting for paid leave. And we began to talk about it. She sees firsthand what it means for herself and her colleagues as well as for the working parents that she helps take care of.

It's time to recognize that quality, affordable childcare is not a luxury. It's a growth strategy. And it's way past time to end the outrage of so many women still earning less than men on the job and women of color making even less. 

You know, all this lost money adds up. And for some women, it's thousands of dollars every year. Now I am well aware that for far too long these challenges have been dismissed by some as women's issues. Well, those days are over. 

Fair pay and fair scheduling, paid family leave and earned sick days, childcare are essential to our competitiveness and our growth. And we can do this in a way that doesn't impose unfair burdens on businesses, especially small businesses.  As president, I'll fight to put families first, just like I have my entire career. 

Now beyond strong growth, we also need fair growth and that will be the second key driver of raising incomes.  The evidence is in. Inequality is a drag on our entire economy. So this is the problem we need to tackle. Now, you may have heard Governor Bush say Americans just need to work longer hours. Well, he must not have met very many American workers. 

Let him tell that to the nurse who stands on her feet all day, or the teacher who in that classroom or the trucker who drives all night. Let him tell that to the fast worker marching in the streets for better pay. They do not need a lecture. They need a raise. 

The truth is the current rules for our economy do reward some work, like financial trading, for example much more than other work, like actually building and selling things, the work that has always been the backbone of our economy. To get all incomes rising again, we need to strike a better balance. If you work hard, you ought to be a fairly. So, we do have to raise the minimum wage, and implement President Obama's new rules on overtime, and then we have to go further. 

I will crack down on bosses who exploit employees by mis-classifying them as contractors or even steal their wages. To make paychecks stretch, we need to take on the major strains on family budgets. I will protect the Affordable Care Act and build on it to lower out-of-pocket health care costs. 

And to make prescription drugs more affordable. We will help families look forward to retirement by defending and enhancing Social Security and making it easier to save for the future. Now, many of these proposals are time-tested and more than a little battle scarred. We need new ideas, as well, and one I believe in and will fight for is profit-sharing. Hard-working Americans deserve to benefit from the record corporate earnings they help produce.

So, I will produce ways to encourage companies to share profits with their employees. That is good for workers and good businesses. Studies show that profit sharing that gives everyone a stake in the company's success can boost productivity and put money directly into employees' pockets. It's a win-win. Later this week in New Hampshire, I will have more to say about how we do this.

Another priority must be reforming our tax code. Now, we hear Republican candidates talk a lot about tax reform. But take a good look at their plans. Senator Rubio's would cut taxes for households making around $3 million a year by almost $240,000, which is way more than three times the earnings of a typical family.

Well, that is a sure budget busting giveaway to the super wealthy, and that's the kind of bad economics you are likely to hear from any of the candidates on the other side. I have a different take...  ... guided license principles. First, hard-working families need and deserve tax relief and simplification. Second, those at the top have to pay their fair share. That's why I support the Buffet Rule, which makes sure millionaires do not pay lower rates than their secretaries. I have called for closing the carried interest loophole, that lets wealthy financiers pay an artificially low rate.

And let's agree that hugely successful companies that benefit from everything that America has to offer, should not be able to game the system and avoid paying their fair share, especially while companies who can't afford high-priced lawyers and lobbyists end up paying more. 

Alongside tax reform, it's time to stand up to efforts across our country to undermine worker bargaining power, which has been proven again and again to drive up wages. Republican governors like Scott Walker have made their names stomping on workers' rights, and practically all the Republican candidates hope to do the same as president. I will fight back against these mean-spirited, misguided attacks. Evidence—  —evidence shows that the decline of unions may be responsible for a third of the increase of inequality among men, so if we want to get serious about raising incomes, we have to get serious about supporting union workers. 

And let me just say a word here about trade. The Greek crisis as well as the Chinese stock market have reminded us that growth here at home and growth an ocean away are linked in a common global economy. Trade has been a major driver of the economy over recent decades, but it has also contributed to hollowing out our manufacturing base and many hard-working communities.

So we do need to set a high bar for trade agreements. We should support them if they create jobs, raise wages and advance our national security. And we should be prepared to walk away if they don't. To create fair growth, we need to create opportunity for more Americans.

I love the saying by Abraham Lincoln who, in many ways, was not only the president who saved our union but the president who understood profoundly the importance of the middle class and the importance of government playing its role in providing opportunities. He talked about giving Americans a fair chance in the race of life. I believe that with all my heart, but I also believe it has to start really early, at birth.

High quality early learning, especially in the first five years, can set children on the course for future success and raise lifetime incomes by 25 percent. And—  —and I'm committed to seeing every 4-year-old in America have access to high quality pre-school in the next 10 years. But I want to do more. I want to call for a great outpouring of support from our faith community, our business community, our academic institutions, from philanthropy and civic groups and concerned citizens, to really help parents, particularly parents who are facing a lot of obstacles, to really help prepare their own children in that 0 to 4 age group.

Eighty percent of your brain is physically formed by the age of 3. That's why families like mine read, talk and sing endlessly to our granddaughter. I've said that her first words are going to be enough with the reading and the talking and the singing. [laughter]

But we do it not only because we love doing it, even though, I'll admit, it's embarrassing, you know, reading a book to a two-week-old or a six-week-old or a 10-week-old, but we do it because we understand it's building her capacity for learning. And the research shows by the time she enters kindergarten, she will have heard 30 million more words than a child from a less advantaged background.

Think of what we are losing because we're not doing everything we can to reach out to those families, and we know, again, from so much research here in the United States and around the world that that early help, that mentoring, that intervention to help those often stressed-out young moms understand more about what they can do and to avoid the difficulties that stand in the way of their being able to really get their child off to the best possible start.

We also have to invest in our students and our teachers at every level, and in the coming weeks and months, I will lay out specific steps to improve our schools, make college truly affordable and help Americans refinance their student debt.

And let's embrace—  —let's embrace the idea of lifelong learning. In an age of technological change, we need to provide pathways to get skills and credentials for new occupations and create online platforms to connect workers to jobs.

There are exciting efforts underway and I want to support and scale the ones that show results.

As we pursue all these policies, we cant forget our fellow Americans hit so hard and left behind by this changing world from the inner cities to coal country to Indian country.

Talent is universal; you find it everywhere. But opportunity is not. There are nearly 6 million young people aged 16 to 24 in America today who are not in school or at work. The numbers for young people of color are particularly staggering.

A quarter of young black men and nearly 15 percent of all Latino youth cannot find a job. We've got to do a better way of coming up to match the growing middle class incomes we want to generate with more pathways into the middle class.

I firmly believe that the best anti-poverty program is a job but that's hard to say if there aren't enough jobs for people that were trying to help lift themselves out of poverty.

That's why Ive called for reviving the new markets tax credit and empowerment zones to create greater incentives to invest in poor and remote areas. When—  —when all Americans have the chance to study hard, work hard and share in our country's prosperity, that's fair growth. It's what I've always believed in and it's what I will fight for as president.

Now the third key driver of income, alongside strong growth and fair growth, must be long-term growth. Too many pressures in our economy push us toward short-termism. Many business leaders see this. They've talked to me about it.

One has called it the problem of quarterly capitalism. They say everything is focused on the next earnings report or the short-term share price and the result is too little attention on the sources of long-term growth: research and development, physical capital and talent.

Net business investment, which includes things like factories, machines and research labs, have declined as a share of the economy.

In recent years some of our biggest companies have spent more than half their earnings to buy back their own stock and another third or more to pay dividends. That doesn't leave a lot left to raise pay or invest in the workers who made those profits possible or to make new investments necessary to ensure a company's future success.

These trends need to change. And I believe many business leaders are eager to embrace their responsibilities, not just to today's share price but also to workers, communities and ultimately to our country and, indeed, our planet.

Now I'm not talking about charity; I'm talking about clear-eyed capitalism. Many companies have prospered by improving wages and training their workers that then yield higher productivity, better service and larger profits.

Now it's easy to try to cut costs by holding down or even decreasing pay and other investments to inflate quarterly stock prices but I would argue that's bad for business in the long run and it's really bad for our country.

Workers are assets. Investing in them pays off; higher wages pay off. Training pays off. To help more companies do that, I proposed a $1,500 tax credit for every worker they train and hire.  And I will soon be proposing a new plan to reform capital gains taxes to reward longer-term investments that create jobs, more than just quick trades. 

I will also propose reforms to help CEOs and shareholders alike to focus on the next decade rather than just the next day. 

Making sure stock buybacks aren't being used only for an immediate boost in share prices; empowering outside investors who want to build companies, but discouraging cut and run shareholders who act more like old-school corporate raiders. And nowhere will the shift from short-term to long-term be more important than on Wall Street.

As a former senator from New York, I know firsthand the role that Wall Street can and should play in our economy, helping main street grow and prosper, and boosting new companies that make America more competitive globally.

But as we all know in the years before the crash, financial firms piled risk upon risk, and regulators in Washington either could not or would not keep up. I was alarmed by this gathering storm and called for addressing the risks of derivatives, cracking down on subprime mortgages and improving financial oversight.

Under President Obama's leadership we have imposed tough new rules that deal with some of the challenges on Wall Street. Those rules have been under assault by Republicans in Congress and those running for president. I will fight back against these attacks and protect the reforms we have made. We can do that, and still ease burdens on community banks to encourage responsible loans to local people and businesses they know and trust.

We also have to go beyond Dodd-Frank. Too many of our major financial institutions are still too complex and too risky. And the problems are not limited to the big banks that get all the headlines. Serious risks are emerging from institutions in the so-called shadow banking system, including hedge funds, high-frequency traders, non-bank finance companies. So many new kinds of entities, which receive little oversight at all.

Stories of misconduct by individuals and institutions in the financial industry are shocking. HSBC allowing drug cartels to launder money, five major banks pleading guilty to felony charges for conspiring to manipulate currency exchange and interest rates. There can be no justification or tolerance for this kind of criminal behavior. 

And while institutions have paid large fines and in some cases admitted guilt, too often it has seemed that the human beings responsible get off with limited consequences or none at all, even when they have already pocketed the gains. This is wrong, and on my watch it will change. Over the course...  ... over the course of this campaign, I will offer plans to rein in excessive risks on Wall Street and ensure that stock markets work for everyday investors, not just high-frequency traders and those with the best or fastest connections. I will appoint and empower regulators who understand that too big to fail is still too big a problem. We will ensure... 

We will ensure that no firm is too complex to manage or oversee. And we will also process individuals as well as firms when they commit fraud or other criminal wrongdoing. 

When the government recovers money from corporations or individuals for harming the public, it should go into a separate trust fund to benefit the public. It could, for example, help modernize infrastructure or even be returned directly to taxpayers.

Now, reform is never easy, but we've done it before in our country, and we have to get it right this time.  And yes, we need leadership from the financial industry and across the private sector to join with us.

Two years ago, the head of the Chicago Mercantile Exchange, Terry Duffy, published an op-ed in the Wall Street Journal that really caught my attention.

He wrote, and I quote, "I'm concerned that those of us in financial services have forgotten who they serve and that the public knows it. Some Wall Streeters can too easily slip into regarding their work as a kind of moneymaking game divorced from concerns of the Main Street," unquote.

I think we should listen to Terry Duffy. Of course, long-term growth is only possible if the public sector steps up as well.

So it's time to end the era of budget brinkmanship and stop careening from one self-inflicted crisis to another. It's time to stop having debates over the small stuff and focus how we're going to tackle the big stuff together.

How do we respond to technological change in a way that creates more good jobs than it displaces or destroys? Can we sustain a boom in advanced manufacturing? What are the best ways to nurture startups outside the successful corridors, like Silicon Valley?

Questions like these demand thoughtful and mature debate from our policymakers and government, from our leaders in the private sector, our economists, our academics, others who can come together to the table and on behalf of America perform their patriotic duty to make sure our economy keeps working and our middle class keeps growing. 

So government has to be smarter, simpler, more focused itself on long-term investments than short-term politics and be a better partner to cities, states and the private sector. Washington has to be a better steward of America's tax dollars and Americans' trust. And please, let's get back to making decisions that rely on evidence more than ideology. 

That's what I'll do as president. I will seek out and welcome any good idea that is actually based on reality. [laughter] 

I want to have principled and pragmatic and progressive policies that really move us forward together, and I will propose ways to ensure that our fiscal outlook is sustainable, including by continuing to restrain health care costs, which remain one of the key drivers of long-term deficits.

I will make sure Washington learns from how well local governments, businesses and nonprofits are working together in successful cities and towns across America.

You know, passing legislation is not the only way to drive progress. As president, I will use the power to convene, connect and collaborate to build partnerships that actually get things done, because above all, we have to break out of the poisonous partisan gridlock and focus on the long-term needs of our country. 

I confess, maybe it's the grandmother in me, but I believe that part of public service is planting trees under whose shade you'll never sit, and the vision I've laid out here today for strong growth, fair growth and long-term growth all working together will get incomes rising again, will help working families get ahead and stay ahead. That is the test of our time.

And I'm inviting everyone to please join me to do your part. That's what great countries do. That's what our country always has done. We rise to challenges. It's not about left, right or center; it's about the future versus the past.

I'm running for president to build an America for tomorrow, not yesterday, an America built on growth and fairness, an America where if you do your part, you will reap the rewards, where we don't leave anyone behind. 

Thank you all. Thank you. I just want to leave you with one more thought. I want every child, not just the granddaughter of a former president or former secretary of state, but every child to be able to reach for her God-given potential. Please join me in that mission—let's do it together.

Thank you all so much. 

Thank you so much, Strobe. Thank you so much. 
Well let me thank you, Strobe. It's great to be back at Brookings and there are a lot of long-time friends and colleagues who perch here at Brookings. Obviously, including Strobe and Martin, who I'll speak to in a minute. Also Bob Einhorn and Tammy Wittes.

This institution has hosted many important conversation over the years and I appreciate Strobe's reference to the event last night and the continuing dialogue about urgent issues facing our nation and the world. That's what brings me here today, back to Brookings, to talk about the question we're all grappling with: how to prevent Iran from acquiring a nuclear weapon and more broadly, how to protect ourselves and our allies from the full range of threats that Iran poses.

The stakes are high and there are no simple of perfectly satisfying solutions. So these questions, and in particular the merits of the nuclear deal recently reached with Iran, have divided people of good will and raised hard issues on both sides.

Here is how I see it. Either we move forward on the path of diplomacy and seize this chance to block Iran's path to a nuclear weapon or, we turn down a more dangerous path, leading to a far-less certain and riskier future. That's why I support this deal. I support it as part of a larger strategy toward Iran.

By now, the outcome in Congress is no longer in much doubt. So we've got to start looking made to what comes next, enforcing the deal, deterring Iran and its proxies and strengthening our allies. These will be my goals as president and today I want to talk about how I would achieve them.

Let me start by saying I understand the skepticism so many feel about Iran. I too am deeply concerned about Iranian aggression and the need to confront it. It's a ruthless, brutal regime that has the blood of Americans, many others and including its own people on its hands.

Its political rallies resound with cries of, "Death to America." Its leaders talk about wiping Israel off the face of the map, most recently just yesterday, and foment terror against it. There is absolutely no reason to trust Iran.

Now, Vice President Cheney may hope that the American people will simply forget, but the truth is, by the time President Obama took office and I became secretary of State, Iran was racing toward a nuclear capability.

They had mastered the nuclear fuel cycle, meaning that they had the material, scientists and technical know how to create material for nuclear weapons. They had produced and installed thousands of centrifuges, expanded their secret facilities, established a robust uranium enrichment program and defied their international obligations under the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty. And they haven't suffered many consequences.

I voted for sanctions again and again as a senator from New York. But they weren't having much effect. Most of the world still did business with Iran. We needed to step up our game.

So President Obama and I pursued a two-prong strategy: pressure and engagement. We made it clear that the door to diplomacy was open if Iran answered the concerns of the international community in a serious and credible way.

We simultaneously launched a comprehensive campaign to significantly raise the cost of Iranian defiance. We systematically increased our military capabilities in the region, deepening our cooperation with partners and sending more fire power, an additional aircraft carrier, battleship, strike aircraft and the most advanced radar and missile defense systems available.

Meanwhile, I traveled the world capital by capital, leader by leader, twisting arms to help build the global coalition that produced some of the most effective sanctions in history.

With President Obama's leadership, we worked with Congress and the European Union to cut Iran off from the world's economic and financial system. And one by one, we persuaded energy-hungry consumers of Iranian oil, like India and South Korea, to cut back.

Soon, Iran's tankers sat rusting in port. Its economy was collapsing.

These new measures were effective because we made them global. American sanctions provided the foundation, but Iran didn't really feel the heat until we turned this into an international campaign so biting that Iran had no choice but to negotiate. They could no longer play off one country against another; they had no place to hide.

So they started looking for a way out. I first visited Oman to speak with the sultan of Oman in January of 2011, went back later that year. The sultan helped set up a secret back channel. I sent one of my closest aids as part of a small team to begin talks with the Iranians in secret.

Negotiations began in earnest after the Iranian election in 2013. First, the bilateral talks led by Deputy Secretary Bill Burns and Jake Sullivan that led to the interim agreement, then the multilateral talks led by Secretary John Kerry, Secretary Ernie Moniz and Undersecretary Wendy Sherman.

Now there's a comprehensive agreement on Iran's nuclear program. Is it perfect? Well, of course not. No agreement like this ever is.

But is a strong agreement? Yes, it is. And we absolutely should not turn it down.

The merits of the deal have been well-argued, so I won't go through them in great detail here. The bottom line is that it accomplishes the major goals we set out to achieve. It blocks every pathway for Iran to get a bomb, and it gives us better tools for verification and inspection and to compel rigorous compliance.  Without a deal, Iran's breakout time, how long they need to produce enough material for a nuclear weapon, would shrink to a couple of months. With a deal, that breakout time stretches to a year, which means that if Iran cheats, we'll know it, and we'll have time to respond decisively.

Without a deal, we would have no credible inspections of Iran's nuclear facilities. With a deal, we'll have unprecedented access; we'll be able to monitor every aspect of their nuclear program.

Now, some have expressed concern that certain nuclear restrictions expire after 15 years. And we need to be vigilant about that, which I'll talk more about in a moment. But other parts are permanent, including Iran's obligations under the Non-proliferation Treaty and their commitment to enhanced inspections under the additional protocol.

Others have expressed concern that it could take up to 24 days to gain access to some of Iran's facilities when we suspect cheating. I'd be the first to say that this part of the deal is not perfect. Although the deal does allow for daily access to enrichment facilities and monitoring of the entire nuclear fuel cycle.

It's important to focus on that, because being able to monitor the supply chain is critical to what we will find out and how we will be able to respond. But our experts tell us that even with delayed access to some places, this deal does the job. Microscopic nuclear particles remain for years and years. They are impossible to hide. That's why Secretary Moniz, a nuclear physicist, has confidence in this plan.

And some are suggested we just go back to the negotiating table and get a better, unspecified deal. I can certainly understand why that may sound appealing, but as someone who started these talks in the first place, and built our global coalition piece by piece, I can assure you it is not realistic. Plus, if we walk away now, our capacity to sustain and enforce sanctions will be severely diminished.

We will be blamed, not the Iranians.

So if we were to reject this agreement, Iran would be poised to get nearly everything it wants without giving up a thing. No restrictions on their nuclear program. No real warning if Tehran suddenly rushes toward a bomb. And the International Sanctions regime would fall apart, so no more economic consequences for Iran, either. Those of use who have been out there on the diplomatic front lines know that diplomacy is not the pursuit of perfection; it's the balancing of risk.

And on balance, the far riskier course right now would be to walk away. Great powers can't just junk agreements and expect the rest of the world to go along with us. We need to be reasonable and consistent, and keep our word, especially when we are trying to lead a coalition.

That is how we will make this and future deals work. But it is not enough to say, "yes," to the deal. Of course it isn't.We have to say, yes, and—yes, and we will enforce it with vigor and vigilance. Yes, and we will embed it in a broader strategy to confront Iran's bad behavior in the region. Yes, and we will begin from day one to set the conditions, so Iran knows it will never get a nuclear weapon, not during the term of the agreement, not after, not ever. We need to be clear. And I think we have to make that very clear to Iran about what we expect from them. This is not the start of some larger diplomatic opening and we shouldn't accept that this deal will lead to broader changes in their behavior.

That shouldn't be a promise for proceeding, instead we need to be prepared for three scenarios. First, Iran tries to cheat, something it's been quite willing to do in the past. Second, Iran tries to wait us out, perhaps it waits to move for 15 years when some, but not all restrictions expire. And third, Iran ramps up the dangerous behavior in the region, including its support for terrorist groups like Hamas and Hezbollah.

I believe the success of this deal has a lot to do with how the next president grapples with these challenges. So let me tell you what I would do. My starting point will be one of distrust.

You remember President Reagan's line about the Soviets: Trust but verify? My approach will be distrust and verify. We should anticipate that Iran will test the next president, they'll want to see how far they can bend the rules. That won't work if I'm in the white house.

I will hold the line against Iranian noncompliance, that means penalties even for small violations, keeping our allies on board, but being willing to snapback sanctions into place unilaterally if we have to, working with congress to close any gaps in the sanctions. Right now members of congress are offering proposals to that affect and I think the current administration should work with them to see whether there are additional steps that could be taken.

Finally it means insuring that the IAEA has the resources it needs from finances to personnel to equipment to hold Iran's feet to the fire. The most important thing we can do to keep Iran from cheating or trying to wait us out is to shaped Iranian expectations right from the start. The Iranians and the world need to understand that we will act decisively if we need to.

So here is my message to Iran's leaders, The United States will never allow you to acquire a nuclear weapon. As president, I will take whatever action is necessary to protect the united states and our allies, I will not hesitate to take military action if Iran attempts to obtain a nuclear weapon, and I will set up my successor to be able to credibly make the same pledge. We will make clear to Iran that our commitment to prevention will not waver depending on who is in office, it's permanent.

Should it become necessary in the future having exhausted peaceful alternatives to turn to military force, we will have preserved and in some cases enhanced our capacity to act. And because we have proven our commitment to diplomacy first, the world will more likely join us.

Then there is the broader issue of countering Iran's bad behavior across the region. Taking nuclear-weapons out of the equation is crucial because an Iran with nuclear weapons is so much more dangerous, than an Iran without them.

But even without nuclear weapons, we still see Iran's fingerprints on nearly every conflict across the Middle East. They support bad actors from Syria, to Lebanon, to Yemen. They vow to destroy Israel. And that's worth saying again. They vow to destroy Israel. We can not ever take that lightly, particularly when Iran ships and advanced missiles to Hezbollah and the ayatollah outlines an actual strategy for eliminating Israel, or talks about how Israel won't exist in 25 years just like he did today.

And in addition to the malicious activity they already underwrite, we have got to anticipate that Iran could use some of the economic relief they get from this deal to pay for even more. So as President I will raise the costs for their actions and confront them across the board. My strategy will be based on five strong pillars.

First, I will deepen America's unshakeable commitment to Israel's security, including our long standing tradition of guaranteeing Israel's qualitative military edge. I'll increase support for Israeli rocket and missile defenses and for intelligence sharing. I'll sell Israel the most sophisticated fire aircraft ever developed. The F-35. We'll work together to develop and implement better tunnel detection technology to prevent arms smuggling and kidnapping as well as the strongest possible missile defense system for Northern Israel, which has been subjected to Hezbollah's attacks for years.

Second, I will reaffirm that the Persian Gulf is a region of vital interest to the United States. We do not want any of Iran's neighbors to develop or acquire a nuclear weapon's program either. So we want them to feel and be secure. I will sustain a robust military presence in the region, especially our air and naval forces. We'll keep the Strait of Hormuz open. We'll increase security cooperation with our Gulf allies, including intelligence sharing, military support and missile defense to ensure they can defend against Iranian aggression. Even if that takes the form of cyberattacks or other non-traditional threats.

Iran should understand that the United States and I as President, will not stand by as our Gulf allies and partners are threatened. We will act. Third, I will be a coalition to counter Iran's proxies, particularly Hezbollah. That means enforcing and strengthening the rules prohibiting the transfer of weapons to Hezbollah. Looking at new ways to choke off their funding and pressing our partners to treat Hezbollah as the terrorist organization that it is.

It's time to eliminate the false distinction that some still make between the supposed political and military wings. If you're part of Hezbollah, you're part of a terrorist organization, plain and simple. Beyond Hezbollah, I'll crack down on the shipment of weapons to Hamas. And push Turkey and Qatar to end their financial support. I'll press our partners in the region to prevent aircrafts and ships owned by companies linked to Iran's revolutionary guard from entering their territories, and urge our partners to block Iranian plans from entering their airspace on their way to Yemen and Syria.

Across the board, I will vigorously enforce and strengthen, if necessary, other American sanctions on Iran and its revolutionary guard for its sponsorship of terrorism, its ballistic missile program and other destabilizing activities.  I'll enforce and strengthen, if necessary, our restrictions on sending arms to Iran and from Iran to bad actors like Syria, and I'll impose these sanctions on everyone involved in these activities, whether they're in Iran or overseas. This will be a special imperative, as some of the U.N. sanctions lapse, so the U.S. and our partners have to step up.

Fourth, I'll stand, as I always have, against Iran's abuses at home, from its detention of political prisoners, to its crack down on freedom of expression, including online. Its inhumane policies hold back talented and spirited people. Our quarrel is not and never has been that the Iranian people. They'd have a bright future, hopeful future if they weren't held back by their leaders.

As I've said before, I think we were too restrained in our support of the protests in June 2009 and in our condemnation of the government crack down that followed. That won't happen again. We will enforce, and if need be, broaden our human rights sanction and I will not rest until every single American detained or missing in Iran is home.

Fifth, just to the nuclear agreement needs to be embedded in a broader Iran policy. Our broader Iran policy needs to be embedded in a comprehensive regional strategy that promotes stability and counters extremism.

Iran, like ISIS, benefits from chaos and strife. It exploits other countries' weaknesses and the best defense against Iran are the countries and governments being strong, that they can provide security and economic opportunity to their own people and they must have the tools to push back on radicalization and extremism.

Helping countries get there will take time and strategic discipline, but it's crucial that the United States leads this effort. I will push for renewed diplomacy to solve the destructive regional conflicts that Iran fuels. We have to bring sufficient pressure on Assad to force a political solution in Syria, including a meaningful increase in our efforts to train and equip the moderate Syrian opposition, something I called for early in the conflict, and the United States must lead in assisting those who have been uprooted by conflict, especially the millions of Syrian refugees now beseeching the world to help them.

As Pope Francis reminded us, this is an international problem that demands an international response, and the United States must help lead that response. That's who we are, and that's what we do.

So our strategy needs to cover all these bases, Iran's nuclear ambitions and its support of terrorism, its hatred of Israel and its cruelty towards its citizens, its military resources and its economic strengths and weaknesses. We need to be creative, committed and vigilant, and on every front, we need to keep working closely with our friends and partners.

On that note, let me just spend a minute speaking about the serious concerns that Israel's leaders have about this deal. Israel has every reason to be alarmed by a regime that both denies its existence and seeks its destruction.  I would not support this agreement for one second if I thought it put Israel in greater danger. I believe in my core that Israel and America must stand side by side, and I—I will always stand by Israel's right to defend itself, as I always have.  I believe this deal and a joint strategy for enforcing it makes Israel safer.

I say that with humility. I'm not Israeli. I don't know what it's like to live under constant threat from your neighbors in a country where the margin for error is so thin. I know that my saying this deal makes you safer won't alleviate the very real fears of the Israeli people.

But I have stood for Israeli security for a very long time. It was one of my bedrock principles as secretary of state. It's why I supported stronger defense systems, like the Iron Dome anti-rocket defense system, which proved so effective in protecting Israeli lives during the conflicts of 2012 and last summer, that's why I've worked closely with Israel to advance the two-state vision of a Jewish and Democratic Israel with secure and recognized borders, and it's why I believe we should expedite negotiations of a long-term military assistance agreement with Israel.

Let's not wait until 2017 when the current deal expires; let's get it done this year.

I would invite the Israeli prime minister to the White House during my first month in office to talk about all of these issues and to set us on a course of close, frequent consultation right from the start, because we both rely on each other for support as partners, allies and friends.

This isn't just about policy for me; it is personal. As president, I'm committed to shoring up and strengthening the relationship between our countries.

We have had honest disagreements about this deal. Now is the time to come together. Now is the time to remember what unites us and build upon it.

And so I know well that the same forces that threaten Israel threaten the United States. And to the people of Israel, let me say, you'll never have to question whether we're with you. The United States will always be with you. There have also been honest disagreements about the nuclear deal here at home. Smart, serious people can see issues like these differently, like my friend, Chuck Schumer, who's going to be an excellent leader in the Senate. I respect the skepticism that he and others feel, and I respect differences of opinion and people who advocate vigorously for their beliefs.

But I have a harder time respecting those who approach an issue as serious as this with unserious talk, especially anyone running to be president of the United States.

Several Republican candidates boast they'll tear up this agreement in 2017, more than a year after it's been implemented. That's not leadership; that's recklessness. It would set us right down the very dangerous path we have worked so hard to avoid.

I'm looking forward to a—a robust debate about foreign policy in this campaign. Where we have disagreements, we should lay them out, like if American ground forces in Iraq should engage in direct combat, as Scott Walker wants, or if we should keep Cuba closed, as Marco Rubio and Jeb Bush want. Let's debate these issues.  But let's debate them on the basis of facts, not fear. Let's resist denigrating the patriotism or loyalty of those who disagree with us, and let's avoid at all costs undermining America's credibility abroad. That only makes us weaker, and I am going to call it out whenever I see it.

I spent four years representing America abroad as America—secretary of state was one of the greatest privileges of my life, and knowing my fellow Americans were counting on the and rooting for me, not as Democrats, not as Republicans, but as Americans, meant to great deal.

We are all one team, the American team and that doesn't change, no matter how much we may disagree. I can tell you from personal experience we are stronger overseas, when we are united at home. So we simply have to find a way to work together better than we have been doing. There is a lot Democrats and Republicans can and should agree on.

The United States should lead in the Middle East, we can agree on that. We should stand by our friends against Iranian aggression, we can agree on that, too. I believe the plan I have laid out today is one that all Americans could endorse, and I hope they will.

The next president will face threats from many quarters, from those we see today like terrorism from ISIS, aggressiveness from Putin, pandemics like Ebola, to all those we can't predict yet.

We need a leader who has a strong vision for the future, and the skill and determination to get us there. We can't stop the world from changing, but we can help to shape those changes, and we can do that by beating with strength, smarts and unyielding commitment to our values. You know, I saw that when I was first lady, senator, secretary of state, that when America leads with principal and purpose, other people and governments are eager to join us.

No country comes close to matching our advantages, the strength of our economy, the skill of our work force, tradition of innovation, our unmatched network of alliances and partnership. So, we are poised to remain that world's most admired and powerful nation for of long time, if we make this smart choices and practice smart leadership. That is what I will try to do as your president, and I believe as strongly as ever that our best days are ahead of us, and that America's greatest contributions to the world are yet to come.

Thank you all very much. 

Thank you, Richard. And thanks for the great work that the council does under your leadership. It truly is an important resource for us all.

Fareed, I look forward to having the conversation with you, everyone here at the council, and Mr. Mayor. Thank you very much for being here and for everything you are doing and will do to keep our city safe and strong. I'm very grateful.

I wanted to come here to our city, which has shown such resilience in the face of terrorism, to talk about the events of the past week, and the work we must do together to protect our country and our friends.

When the United States was hit on 9/11, our allies treated that attack against one as an attack against all. Now, it's our turn to stand in solidarity with France and all of our friends. We cherish the same values. We face the same adversaries. We must share the same determination.

After a major terrorist attack, every society faces a choice between fear and resolve. The world's great democracies can't sacrifice our values or turn our backs on those in need. Therefore, we must choose resolve. And we must lead the world to meet this threat.

Now, let's be clear about what we're facing. Beyond Paris in recent days, we've seen deadly terrorist attacks in Nigeria, Lebanon, Iraq and Turkey, and a Russian civilian airline destroyed over the Sinai. At the heart of today's new landscape of terror is ISIS. They persecute religious and ethnic minorities; kidnap and behead civilians; murder children. They systematically enslave, torture and rape women and girls.

ISIS operates across three mutually reinforcing dimensions: a physical enclave in Iraq and Syria; an international terrorist network that includes affiliates across the region and beyond; and an ideological movement of radical jihadism. We have to target and defeat all three, and time is of the essence.

ISIS is demonstrating new ambition, reach and capabilities. We have to break the group's momentum and then its back. Our goal is not to deter or contain ISIS, but to defeat and destroy ISIS.

But we have learned that we can score victories over terrorist leaders and networks, only to face metastasizing threats down the road, so we also have to play and win the long game. We should pursue a comprehensive counterterrorism strategy, one that embeds our mission against ISIS within a broader struggle against radical jihadism that is bigger than any one group, whether it's Al Qaida or ISIS or some other network.

An immediate war against an urgent enemy and a generational struggle against an ideology with deep roots will not be easily torn out. It will require sustained commitment in every pillar of American power. This is a worldwide fight, and American must lead it.

Our strategy should have three main elements. One, defeat ISIS in Syria, Iraq and across the Middle East; two, disrupt and dismantle the growing terrorist infrastructure that facilitates the flow of fighters, financing arms and propaganda around the world; three, harden our defenses and those of our allies against external and homegrown threats.

Let me start with the campaign to defeat ISIS across the region. The United States and our international coalition has been conducting this fight for more than a year. It's time to begin a new phase and intensify and broaden our efforts to smash the would-be caliphate and deny ISIS control of territory in Iraq and Syria. That starts with a more effective coalition air campaign, with more allied planes, more strikes and a broader target set.

A key obstacle standing in the way is a shortage of good intelligence about ISIS and its operations, so we need an immediate intelligence surge in the region, including technical assets, Arabic speakers with deep expertise in the Middle East and even closer partnership with regional intelligence services. Our goal should be to achieve the kind of penetration we accomplished with Al Qaida in the past. This would help us identify and eliminate ISIS' command and control and its economic lifelines.

A more effective coalition air campaign is necessary, but not sufficient, and we should be honest about the fact that to be successful, airstrikes will have to be combined with ground forces actually taking back more territory from ISIS. Like President Obama, I do not believe that we should again have 100,000 American troops in combat in the Middle East. That is just not the smart move to make here. If we have learned anything from 15 years of war in Iraq and Afghanistan, it's that local people and nations have to secure their own communities. We can help them, and we should, but we cannot substitute for them. But we can and should support local and regional ground forces in carrying out this mission.

Now, the obstacles to achieving this are significant. On the Iraqi side of the border, Kurdish forces have fought bravely to defend their own lands and to re-take towns from ISIS, but the Iraqi national army has struggled, and it's going to take more work to get it up to fighting shape. As part of that process, we may have to give our own troops advising and training the Iraqis greater freedom of movement and flexibility, including embedding in local units and helping target airstrikes.

Ultimately, however, a ground campaign in Iraq will only succeed if more Iraqi Sunnis join the fight. But that won't happen so long as they do not feel they have a stake in their country or confidence in their own security and capacity to confront ISIS.

Now, we've been in a similar place before in Iraq. In the first Sunni awakening in 2007, we were able to provide sufficient support and assurances to the Sunni tribes to persuade them to join us in rooting out Al Qaida. Unfortunately, under Prime Minister Maliki's rule, those tribes were betrayed and forgotten.

So the task of bringing Sunnis off the sidelines into this new fight will be considerably more difficult. But nonetheless, we need to lay the foundation for a second Sunni awakening. We need to put sustained pressure on the government in Baghdad to get its political house in order, move forward with national reconciliation, and finally stand up a national guard. Baghdad needs to accept, even embrace, arming Sunni and Kurdish forces in the war against ISIS. But if Baghdad won't do that, the coalition should do so directly.

On the Syrian side, the big obstacle to getting more ground forces to engage ISIS, beyond the Syrian Kurds who are already deep in the fight, is that the viable Sunni opposition groups remain understandably preoccupied with fighting Assad who, let us remember, has killed many more Syrians than the terrorists have. But they are increasingly under threat from ISIS as well.

So we need to move simultaneously toward a political solution to the civil war that paves the way for a new government with new leadership, and to encourage more Syrians to take on ISIS as well. To support them, we should immediately deploy the special operations force President Obama has already authorized, and be prepared to deploy more as more Syrians get into the fight. And we should retool and ramp up our efforts to support and equip viable Syrian opposition units.

Our increased support should go hand in hand with increased support from our Arab and European partners, including special forces who can contribute to the fight on the ground. We should also work with the coalition and the neighbors to impose no-fly zones that will stop Assad from slaughtering civilians and the opposition from the air. Opposition forces on the ground, with material support from the coalition, could then help create safe areas where Syrians could remain in the country, rather than fleeing toward Europe.

This combined approach would help enable the opposition to retake the remaining stretch of the Turkish border from ISIS, choking off its supply lines. It would also give us new leverage in the diplomatic process that Secretary Kerry is pursuing.

Of course, we've been down plenty of diplomatic dead-ends before in this conflict. But we have models for how seemingly intractable multi-sectarian civil wars do eventually end. We can learn lessons from Lebanon and Bosnia about what it will take. And Russia and Iran have to face the fact that continuing to prop up a vicious dictator will not bring stability.

Right now, I'm afraid, President Putin is actually making things somewhat worse.

Now, to be clear, though, there is an important role for Russia to help in resolving the conflict in Syria. And we have indicated a willingness to work with them toward an outcome that preserves Syria as a unitary, nonsectarian state, with protections for the rights of all Syrians and to keep key state institutions intact.

There is no alternative to a political transition that allows Syrians to end Assad's rule.

Now, much of this strategy on both sides of the border hinges on the roles of our Arab and Turkish partners. And we must get them to carry their share of the burden, with military intelligence and financial contributions, as well as using their influence with fighters and tribes in Iraq and Syria.

Countries like Jordan have offered more, and we should take them up on it, because ultimately our efforts will only succeed if the Arabs and Turks step up in a much bigger way. This is their fight and they need to act like it.

So far, however, Turkey has been more focused on the Kurds than on countering ISIS. And to be fair, Turkey has a long and painful history with Kurdish terrorist groups. But the threat from ISIS cannot wait. As difficult as it may be, we need to get Turkey to stop bombing Kurdish fighters in Syria who are battling ISIS, and become a full partner in our coalition efforts against ISIS.

The United States should also work with our Arab partners to get them more invested in the fight against ISIS. At the moment, they're focused in other areas because of their concerns in the region, especially the threat from Iran. That's why the Saudis, for example, shifted attention from Syria to Yemen. So we have to work out a common approach.

In September, I laid out a comprehensive plan to counter Iranian influence across the region and its support for terrorist proxies such as Hezbollah and Hamas. We cannot view Iran and ISIS as separate challenges. Regional politics are too interwoven. Raising the confidence of our Arab partners and raising the costs to Iran for bad behavior will contribute to a more effective fight against ISIS.

And as we work out a broader regional approach, we should, of course, be closely consulting with Israel, our strongest ally in the Middle East. Israel increasingly shares with our Arab partners and has the opportunity to do more in intelligence and joint efforts as well.

Now, we should have no illusions about how difficult the mission before us really is. We have to fit a lot of pieces together, bring along a lot of partners, move on multiple fronts at once. But if we press forward on both sides of the border, in the air and on the ground, as well as diplomatically, I do believe we can crush ISIS's enclave of terror.

And to support this campaign, Congress should swiftly pass an updated authorization to use military force. That will send a message to friend and foe alike that the United States is committed to this fight. The time for delay is over. We should get this done.

Now, the second element of our strategy looks beyond the immediate battlefield of Iraq and Syria, to disrupt and dismantle global terrorist infrastructure on the ground and online.

A terror pipeline that facilitates the flow of fighters, financing, arms and propaganda around the world has allowed ISIS to strike at the heart of Paris last week and an Al Qaida affiliate to do the same at Charlie Hebdo earlier this year. ISIS is working hard to extend its reach, establish affiliates and cells far from its home base, and despite the significant setbacks it has encountered, not just with ISIS and its ambitious plans, but even Al Qaida, including the death of Osama bin Laden, they are still posing great threats to so many.

Let's take one example. We've had a lot of conversation about ISIS in the last week, let's not forget Al Qaida. They still have the most sophisticated bombmakers, ambitious plotters and active affiliates in places like Yemen and North Africa, so we can't just focus on Iraq and Syria, we need to intensify our counter—our counterterrorism efforts on a wider scope.

Most urgent is stopping the flow of foreign fighters to and from the war zones of the Middle East. Thousands—thousands of young recruits have flocked to Syria from France, Germany, Belgium, the United Kingdom and, yes, even the United States. Their western passports make it easier for them to cross borders and eventually return home radicalized and battle hardened. Stemming this tide will require much better coordination and information-sharing among countries every step of the way. We should not stop pressing until Turkey, where most foreign fighters cross into Syria, finally locks down its border.

The United States and our allies need to know and share the identities of every fighter who has traveled to Syria. We also have to be smart and target interventions that will have the greatest impact. For example, we need a greater focus on shutting down key enablers who arrange transportation, documents and more.

When it comes to terrorist financing, we have to go after the nodes that facilitate illicit trade and transactions. The U.N. Security Council should update its terrorism sanctions. They have a resolution that does try to block terrorist financing and other enabling activities, but we have to place more obligations on countries to police their own banks, and the United States, which has quite a record of success in this area, can share more intelligence to help other countries. And once and for all, the Saudis, the Qataris and others need to stop their citizens from directly funding extremist organizations as well as the schools and mosques around the world that have set too many young people on a path to radicalization. When it comes to blocking terrorist recruitment, we have to identify the hotspots, the specific neighborhoods and villages, the prisons and schools where recruitment happens in clusters, like the neighborhood in Brussels where the Paris attacks were planned. Through partnerships with local law enforcement and civil society, especially with Muslim community leaders, we have to work to tip the balance away from extremism in these hotspots.

Radicalization and recruitment also is happening online. There's no doubt we have to do a better job contesting online space, including websites and chat rooms where jihadists communicate with followers. We must deny them virtual territory just as we deny them actual territory.

At the State Department, I built up a unit of communication specialists fluent in Urdu, Arabic, Somali and other languages to battle with extremists online.

We need more of that, including from the private sector. Social media companies can also do their part by swiftly shutting down terrorist accounts, so they're not used to plan, provoke or celebrate violence.

Online or off-line, the bottom line is that we are in a contest of ideas against an ideology of hate, and we have to win. Let's be clear, though, Islam is not our adversary. Muslims are peaceful and tolerant people, and have nothing whatsoever to do with terrorism. The obsession in some quarters with a clash of civilization, or repeating the specific words radical Islamic terrorism isn't just a distraction, it gives these criminals, these murderers more standing than they deserve. It actually plays into their hands by alienating partners we need by our side.

Our priority should be how to fight the enemy. In the end, it didn't matter what kind of terrorist we call bin Laden, it mattered that we killed bin Laden. But we still can't close our eyes to the fact that there is a distorted and dangerous stream of extremism within the Muslim world that continues to spread. Its adherents are relatively few in number, but capable of causing profound damage, most especially to their own communities throughout an arc of instability that stretches from North and West Africa to Asia.

Overlapping conflicts, collapsing state structures, widespread corruption, poverty and repression have created openings for extremists to exploit.

Before the Arab Spring, I warned that the region's foundations would sink into the sand without immediate reforms. Well, the need has only grown more urgent. We have to join with our partners to do the patient's steady work of empowering moderates and marginalizing extremists; supporting democratic institutions and the rule of law; creating economic growth that supports stability; working to curb corruption, helping training effective and accountable law enforcement, intelligence and counterterrorism services. As we do this, we must be building up a global counterterrorism infrastructure that is more active and adaptable than the terror networks we're trying to defeat.

When I became secretary of State, I was surprised to find that nearly a decade after 9/11, there was still no dedicated international vehicle to regularly convene key countries to deal with terrorist threats.

So, we created the Global Counterterrorism Forum, which now brings together nearly 30 countries, many from the Muslim world. It should be a clearing house for directing assistance to countries that need it, for mobilizing common action against threats.

And let's not lose sight of the global cooperation needed to lock down loose nuclear material and chemical and biological weapons, and keep them out of the hands of terrorists.

At the end of the day, we still must be prepared to go after terrorists wherever they plot using all the tools at our disposal, that includes targeted strikes by U.S. military aircraft and drones, with proper safeguards when there are any other viable options to deal with continuing imminent threats.

All of this—stopping foreign fighters, blocking terrorist financing, doing battle in cyberspace—is vital to the war against ISIS, but it also lays the foundation for defusing and defeating the next threat and the one after that.

Now, the third element of our strategy has to be hardening our defenses at home and helping our partners do the same against both external and home-grown threats. After 9/11, the United States made a lot of progress breaking down bureaucratic barriers to allow for more and better information sharing among agencies responsible for keeping us safe.

We still have work to do on this front, but by comparison, Europe is way behind. Today, European nations don't even always alert each other when they turn away a suspected jihadist at the border, or when a passport is stolen. It seems like after most terrorist attacks, we find out that the perpetrators were known to some security service or another, but too often the dots never get connected.

I appreciate how hard this is, especially given the sheer number of suspects and threats, but this has to change. The United States must work with Europe to dramatically and immediately improve intelligence sharing and counterterrorism coordination. European countries also should have the flexibility to enhance their border controls when circumstances warrant.

And here at home, we face a number of our own challenges. The threat to airline security is evolving as terrorists develop new devices like nonmetallic bombs. So our defenses have to stay at least one step ahead. We know that intelligence gathered and shared by local law enforcement officers is absolutely critical to breaking up plots and preventing attacks. So they need all the resources and support we can give them.

Law enforcement also needs the trust of residents and communities, including in our own country Muslim Americans. Now, this should go without saying, but in the current climate, it bears repeating. Muslim Americans are working every day on the front lines of the fight against radicalization.

Another challenge is how to strike the right balance of protecting privacy and security. Encryption of mobile communications presents a particularly tough problem. We should take the concerns of law enforcement and counterterrorism professionals seriously. They have warned that impenetrable encryption may prevent them from accessing terrorist communications and preventing a future attack. On the other hand, we know there are legitimate concerns about government intrusion, network security, and creating new vulnerabilities that bad actors can and would exploit. So we need Silicon Valley not to view government as its adversary. We need to challenge our best minds in the private sector to work with our best minds in the public sector to develop solutions that will both keep us safe and protect our privacy.

Now is the time to solve this problem, not after the next attack.

Since Paris, no homeland security challenge is being more hotly debated than how to handle Syrian refugees seeking safety in the United States. Our highest priority, of course, must always be protecting the American people. So yes, we do need to be vigilant in screening and vetting any refugees from Syria, guided by the best judgment of our security professionals, in close coordination with our allies and partners.

And Congress need to make sure the necessary resources are provided for comprehensive background checks, drawing on the best intelligence we can get. And we should be taking a close look at the safeguards in the visa programs as well, but we cannot allow terrorists to intimidate us into abandoning our values and our humanitarian obligations. Turning away orphans, applying a religious test, discriminating against Muslims, slamming the door on every Syrian refugee, that is just not who we are. We are better than that.

And remember, many of these refugees are fleeing the same terrorists who threaten us. It would be a cruel irony indeed if ISIS can force families from their homes and then also prevent them from ever finding new ones. We should be doing more to ease this humanitarian crisis, not less. We should lead the international community in organizing a donor conference and supporting countries like Jordan who are sheltering the majority of refugees fleeing Syria.

And we can get this right. America's open, free, tolerant society is described by some as a vulnerability in the struggle against terrorism, but I actually believe it's one of our strengths. It reduces the appeal of radicalism and enhances the richness and resilience of our communities. This is not a time for scoring political points.

When New York was attacked on 9/11, we had a Republican president, a Republican governor and a Republican mayor, and I worked with all of them. We pulled together and put partisanship aside to rebuild our city and protect our country. This is a time for American leadership. No other country can rally the world to defeat ISIS and win the generational struggle against radical jihadism. Only the United States can mobilize common action on a global scale, and that's exactly what we need. The entire world must be part of this fight, but we must lead it.

There's been a lot of talk lately about coalitions. Everyone seems to want one, but there's not nearly as much talk about what it actually takes to make a coalition work in the heat and pressure of an international crisis. I know how hard this is because we've done it before. To impose the toughest sanctions in history on Iran, to stop a dictator from slaughtering his people in Libya, to support a fledgling democracy in Afghanistan, we have to use every pillar of American power—military and diplomacy, development and economic and cultural influence, technology and maybe most importantly our values. That is smart power.

We have to work with institutions and partners like NATO, the E.U., the Arab League and the U.N., strengthen our alliances and never get tired of old-fashioned shoe leather diplomacy, and if necessary be prepared to act decisively on our own, just as we did it to bring Osama bin Laden to justice.

The United States and our allies must demonstrate that free people and free markets are still the hope of humanity. This past week, as I watched the tragic scenes from France, I kept thinking back to a young man in the world met in January after the last attack in Paris. His name was Lassana, a Muslim immigrant from Mali who worked at a kosher market. He said the market had become a new home and his colleagues and customers a second family.

When the terrorist arrived and the gunfire began, Lassana risked his life to protect his Jewish customers. He moved quickly, hiding as many people as he could in the cold storage room, and then slipping out to help the police.

"I didn't know or care, he said, if they were Jews or Christians or Muslims. We're all in the same boat." What a rebuke to the extremists' hatred.

The French government announced it would grant Lassana full citizenship. But when it mattered most, he proved he was a citizen already.

That's the power of free people. That's what the jihadis will never understand and never defeat. And as we meet here today, let us resolve that we will go forward together, and we will do all we can to lead the world against this threat that threatens people everywhere.

To be here in this beautiful city and church that has been the site of a lot of occasions. And especially to be introduced by Brenda, who, as she said, I first met in a town hall in Dover all those months ago. 

And you know, when you call on people in town halls, as you'll see in a minute, you have no idea what they're going to say or what they are going to ask. And when I called on her, she basically said I have a husband with early onset Alzheimer's, I have a mother with Alzheimer's. I'm taking care of them. What are you going to do about Alzheimer's?

And it really caused me to think hard about the kind of president I want to be. Obviously, I want to be a president who gets the economy moving for everybody and get incomes rising and more good paying jobs. And I want to be a president that keeps us safe and secure, and takes on the threat and dangers that we face.

But I also want to be a president who works for families, like Brenda's. Who understands that the problems we keep you up at night are ones that we also have to take seriously. So, it means the world to me to have her support in this campaign.

And as I've said to her and to others who have raised issues with me during the course of my time here in New Hampshire, I will do everything I can to try and find answers. You know, in Alzheimer's, as she said, we have got five million people currently suffering. The projection is for many millions more.

It is the sixth leading cause of death in America. But unlike the other causes in the top ten, there is no real path to prevention or effective treatment, or a cure, as there is with other diseases that take so many lives.

So, my proposal is that we tackle all three of those. What can we do to try and prevent it? What can we do to try to more effectively treat it? And what would it take to invest in finding a cure? And after talking to experts, the leading experts in our country—not just in Alzheimer's, but in other neurodegenerative diseases, like Parkinson's, the overwhelming response was, if we invested just $2 billion more a year, we would make tremendous progress.

And we would have a real shot at understanding more about this disease and trying to cure it. And the heavens support what we are going to do on behalf of Alzheimer's, and the patients, the families and the caregivers. 

So, I want to thank my friend Terry Narelli , who I see here, for her great service and leadership over so many years, and for her friendship. And I want to just make a few other quick acknowledgments. And then we will move on to be ready for the questions.

The mayor. I want to thank the mayor. Where is Mayor Lister? I saw him earlier. He's here somewhere. There he is. There he is. Thank you so much, Mayor. Wonderful to see you, thank you for your support. And to the South Church, thank you for letting us be here today. 

And to the overflow, which I stopped by to see on my way here. It was packed. We thank you for your patience. They have got a big screen, they are having a good time watching. And we are delighted they are here as well.

As Brenda said, on January 20, 2017, someone will raise a hand and take the oath of office, and become our 45th president. That person will, after being sworn in, and the celebrations that go with an inauguration, go into the White House, go into the oval office, and face the challenges that await.

This will be a consequential election in so many ways. Because we have work to do. I'm excited about the work. I'm confident and optimistic about the work we can do together. 

But I need all of you to be part of this campaign, to be part of the first in the nation primary, because in many ways, you are the first—or depending on how you define it, the last line of defense.

The decision that New Hampshire makes is so important. And I've had a great time traveling across the state, meeting, by now, thousands and thousands of people. Having a chance to set forth my ideas and answer questions on whatever might be on someone's mind.

And I know that we are going to make the right decision—not because my name will be on the ballot, but because all of us know what the stakes are, and how high they happen to be.

So I'm excited and very much looking forward to the sprint towards the primary and to have a chance to hear even more for more folks here in the granite state about what is on your mind, about the big economic challenges, the security issues, and all those problems they keep you up at night.

I have learned a lot listening to folks here in New Hampshire. I learned a lot about the struggles, the opportunities, the disappointments. As you know, I have had two full town hall meetings just on the issue of substance abuse. When I made a list of what I was going to talk about in this campaign, it wasn't on that list.

But on my first trip here to New Hampshire in Keene, that was what was raised with me. And then on visit after visit, I was given mass cards showing the pictures of beautiful young people no longer with us because of overdoses. I met those in recovery, who thankfully, were able to get help when they needed it. I met grandmothers like myself, raising children because their children couldn't, lost to opioid addiction, heroin addiction. So that's why taking the big issue to me.

I will never stop leading with the values that I was raised with about who we are as Americans, what we're capable of doing. I will never stop listening, learning about what's on people's minds. I think you actually learn more when you listen. And I will never stop trying to work with you to solve problems.

That's the America that I was raised in, that's the America that I think we all cherish and that's the America that I'm going to do everything I can as your president to make sure it's stronger and better and fairer for everybody going forward. 

So let me now turn to all of you and if you raise your hand, I think we have some microphones somewhere that we will try to get to you and give you a chance. This young—this woman right there. Yes, right there. Yes. Please stand up. Great.

Oh, my goodness. I'll tell you, it was worth it, trying to get here. You have been so generous with your time. And I'm just so grateful to be back in Marshalltown and to have this chance to talk with you, now less than a week until the caucus on Monday night. But it's just really meaningful to me that you would be here and be part of this process, and I really am grateful to each and every one of you.

I've learned a lot in the last months, and I really think that spending all this time in small groups and big ones is going to make me a better president. So I thank you for everything you've done to make that possible. 

And I really want to thank Mark Smith for his endorsement. I'm thrilled. Thank you so very much, Representative. And I have a—I have a plan that I hope will come to pass when it—that affects Mark. And that is I hope that we will be able to make him the majority leader of the House of Representatives in the state legislature. 

Think of all the good things that he could do for you and for people across Iowa.

Well, it's getting close. And when all of you decide to go caucus on Monday, you're going to be the first people in the world to get to express an opinion about who should be the next president and commander in chief for our country.

And I know how seriously Iowans take this because I've been talking with you and listening to you. But I want to just spend a few minutes really discussing what's at stake, because this is one of the most consequential elections that we've had in quite some time.

When you think about it, there are some very big differences between us and the Republicans, and that puts a special responsibility on you and voters to try to decide where you stand. Well, I will tell you where I stand.

I believe that the Republican policies that are being promoted by this crop of candidates that are traveling across our state and country would set our country back, rip up the progress we've made, and undermine our future. And that is true across the board, but let me just pick a few of the most important issues. Let's take the economy.

You heard from them, they are spouting the same failed economic policies: trickle-down economics; cut taxes on the wealthy; get out of the way of corporations. We have tried that, it does not work. And it's important to know the facts. And the facts are that our economy does better when we have a Democrat in the White House who cares about creating jobs and raising incomes for Americans. 

And the last two Democratic presidents we've had, both of whom I know, which I kind of am proud of, they each inherited economic problems from their Republican predecessors.

You know, in my husband's case, it was a recession, a huge national debt that had been quadrupled in the prior 12 years and a big deficit. So when he got to Washington, people said, "OK. So, what do you especially bring to Washington that can make a difference?" He said, "Well, I guess I bring arithmetic. We're going to make it add up again for the American people." And at the end of eight years, we did.

Twenty-three million new jobs, but most importantly, incomes went up for everybody. Not just those at the top, hard-working middle-class families, working families, poor families. More people were lifted out of poverty than in any recent time in our history. And we ended up with a balanced budget and a surplus. We were on the right track.

Well, back came the Republicans and back came trickle-down economics. George W. Bush slashed taxes on the wealthy and got out of the way of corporations to the extent that the man he put in charge of keeping an eye on Wall Street took a chainsaw to a big stack of regulations and had a great big smile on his face.

Now we know what happened, don't we? We went into the greatest financial crisis since the Great Depression, and when Barack Obama became president, we were losing 800,000 jobs a month. I don't think President Obama gets the credit he deserves for digging us out of that big ditch that the Republicans put us in during their administration. 

And it was not easy. I know; I talked to him about it. When he asked me to be secretary of State, he said, "We got to focus on the economy here at home and we got to fix all the problems that we also inherited around the world."

And what did he do? Well, we're back on track with 14 million new jobs. The Affordable Care Act was passed. We're now at 90 percent health care coverage in America for the first time. 

He passed and signed the toughest regulations on Wall Street since the 1930s, the Dodd-Frank law; saved the auto industry, which was on the brink of collapse which would have taken another, you know, couple of million jobs down with them. We ended up losing 9 million because of that Great Recession, 5 million homes were lost and $13 trillion in family wealth was wiped out.

Now, if you want to go back there, you got a lot of folks, including one who was here today, who are spouting that same stuff, because that's where we'll end up again. In fact, you are four times more likely to see a recession in America when you have a Republican in the White House.

So the economy is going to be at the core of this election. So you should ask everybody who's running what they're going to do about it. And I got to tell you, I'm proud of what we've been doing on the Democratic side. We have our differences, but we have differences over issues, and that's what we talk about, not insults, which is what happens among the Republicans.

So I've put out a plan. Here is what I think we need to do. We need more infrastructure jobs. Our roads, our bridges, our tunnels, our ports, our airports, our rail systems, our sewer systems, our water systems. We have work to do in our country, and those are jobs that can't be exported, they need to be done right here and put Americans back to work building our economy, making us more competitive.

And then we're going to take the tax system and get rid of the incentives that actually encourage people to take jobs and move them overseas, take factories and build them overseas. We're going to reverse that so we start investing in America again, advance manufacturing. I know it can be done because I've been to some of your community colleges. I have seen the work that is happening there, the training that is going on.

I also know it can be done because while we are going to combat climate change, we're going to create more clean, renewable energy jobs. And that will be a huge economic opportunity——that is directly linked to what Iowa has been doing.

You know, the Republicans, when you ask them about climate change, they all say the same thing. "Well, I don't know, I'm not a scientist." You know, there's an easy way to remedy that. Go talk to a scientist, listen to a scientist, learn about what's going on. And, you know, that's bad enough that they're into denial. What really is troubling is they're missing this huge economic opportunity.

And when I tell people that, I see, you know, sometimes folks around the country have a little bit of skepticism on their faces, and here's what I tell them. I know we can create those jobs because look at what Iowa has done.

And I want you to thank Representative Smith. Thank you. And it started with Tom Vilsack and the Democrats making a commitment. Iowa now gets one-third of your electricity from renewable sources, mostly wind.

You have 7,000 people already working in the wind industry in this state. You are doing research on advanced biofuels that the Defense Department thinks may be able to fuel Navy vessels and Air Force planes. So Iowa is in the forefront of the energy revolution because some country is going to be the 21st century clean energy superpower. It's either going to be China, Germany, or us. I want it to be us, and we need to make up our minds that it is going to be us and we're going to be doing the technology, the innovation and exporting to the rest of the world. 

We also need to be focusing on small business because that's where most of the jobs come from in America. And I want to be the small business president. My dad was a small businessman, so I want to clear away all the underbrush so people can start businesses again. And especially young people. S lot of young people tell me they'd love to go into business, but they can't get credit. Part of it is they have such student debts they can't get credit; we've got to fix that. So we need to make it easier to start and grow a small business.

Now, there are two ways we can raise incomes real quick. One, we've got to raise the minimum wage. People who work full time should not still be in poverty. 

There should be a ladder of opportunity. And the other way is to guarantee equal pay for women's work, and that will raise incomes and families will be better off, the economy will be. 

Now, everything I've just said to you the Republicans don't agree with it, every bit of it. They don't believe in any of it. They don't really tell you what they will do except just, you know, get out of the way and let corporations do whatever they want and let their, you know, big donors do whatever they want. Well, that's not going to work. We know it won't, and we can't be sold that bill of goods again.

The other thing we have to do is to change the tax system so that it is fairer. And I'm am the only candidate running on either side who has made this pledge. I will raise your incomes, I will not raise middle-class taxes. I do not think it is right——to be going to people who suffered because of the Republican recession and asking for you to help us make the investments for the future. I want you to take advantage of them, but I want to go where the money is, and the money is at the top, and that's where we need to be shifting our tax system. So we need to close the loopholes and the special gimmicks that corporations and the wealthy use, like this thing called the "carried interest loophole" that I've been against for years.

We also need to do what Warren Buffett suggested. I was really very happy that he endorsed me, and I went to Omaha with him. And we were standing there and he——he said, you know, I'm not too popular among my rich friends these days because I think people like me should pay more money into our tax system to support our country. And he has something he calls the Buffett rule. Anybody who makes $1 million should have to pay a 30 percent effective tax rate. So I've adopted the Buffett rule and we're going to go right at it and try to get that done. 

And then I want to go further, I want to impose what I call a fair share surcharge on incomes of $5 million or more. Now, there aren't very many of those, but there's a lot of money there because I want to use that money to make college affordable. I want to use that money to invest in clean energy. I want to use that money to move toward paid family leave so that families get more support to be able to do their work at home and take care of their families. I want to use that money to help bring down the cost of child care, which in some states is as expensive as college tuition. There are things we can do that will relieve the burdens on middle-class families, and the money should come from those who have it.

Now, people say to me, "Well, how are we ever going to get that done?" Well, I do have a political strategy. I've seen a little bit of this in the last 20-plus years. There are not that many people who make $5 million or more in America, and I think we can make a very clear case.

Mr. Congressman over there, are you in favor of clean energy and affordable college? Are you in favor of early childhood education and the way we're going to get it is to tax the two people in your district who make more than $5 million? Or are you going to deny that to the 350,000 people who live in your district?

We're going to make a very tough case about why we have to make the tax code fairer. You know, you can talk about it, but I have a plan to do it. Not just a plan on the substance, but a political plan because I want you to know what I aim to do for you and what it will cost you. And I want everybody to be able to look at that and make your own judgment.

I also have what has been described as the toughest, most effective, comprehensive plan to go after Wall Street.

Now, I totally agree with my two esteemed opponents, Senator Sanders and Governor O'Malley, that we've got to keep our eyes on the big banks. And no bank is too big to fail and no executive is too powerful to jail. But we already have the authority to go after them. That was in the Dodd-Frank bill. We don't have to do that, we just have to implement it. And I have said if they pose a systemic risk to our economy, I will go after them and I will use the process President Obama signed into law.

But here's where I differ with my two friends—that is not enough. And this is what we've been arguing about on the debate stage. You see it wasn't just the big banks that caused our problems, it was an investment bank like Lehman Brothers. It was a big insurance conglomerate called AIG. It was a mortgage company called Countrywide. It was another bank, not one of the big five, called Wachovia, and others who are in what is called the shadow banking sector.

So what I've is we're going after risk wherever it is in the financial system. And Paul Krugman, the Nobel Prize-winning economist, said I have the best plan. Barney Frank, who is actually the Frank in Dodd-Frank, said I have the best plan because I'm trying to look not just at what happened in the past to prevent that from happening again, but what could happen in the future.

And you know, the best evidence I have that I have the best plan is that the Republicans and their billionaire allies are running ads against me. You know, it started a few weeks ago. These two hedge fund billionaires formed a super PAC to run ads against me to convince Democrats not to support me. And then along came Karl Rove, you know, the errand boy for the billionaires, and he's now running an ad against me. And now another billionaire has jumped in, and he's now running an ad against me.

Now you got to stop to think, why are they spending all this money to try to convince Democrats not to support me? Well, I think you know the answer, because they know that I say what I mean, I do what I say I will do, and I know how to get it done, to take after them, to prevent them from——pushing an agenda on us that hurts the economy.

Now, another area where I have very strong feelings and share exactly the same goal as Senator Sanders is health care. You know, I believe in universal health care coverage. Every American should have it. You know, before it was called Obamacare it was called Hillarycare back in '93 and '94 when I was trying to get universal health care, and we were not successful. And that was really disappointing.

I mean, the drug companies, the insurance companies spent millions of dollars against us. So we didn't succeed. And then I got to thinking, well, what can I do now? Because, you know, my view is when you're knocked down, you share the human experience because everybody gets knocked down about something. The real question is whether you get back up. So I started thinking, what can I do that can help somebody make a difference in their lives.

And I remembered when I was traveling around the country trying to get universal health care, meeting so many people who did not have health insurance, they couldn't afford it, they had a pre-existing condition and the insurance companies wouldn't give it to them. And I met so many really good, decent people who are so overwhelmed by what was happening to them. And I remember I was at the Children's Hospital in Cleveland. I was meeting with a group of parents whose kids were really sick with chronic diseases. And one man said to me, he said, "You know, I've gone everywhere to try to get insurance for my daughters. I have two girls with cystic fibrosis, and nobody will sell it to me."

I said what do they say when you go ask them and you tell them you want to try to pay for something? They say no. He said, I'll tell you what the last person told me at the insurance company I visited. He said, we don't insure burning houses. This man said, they called my little girls burning houses. And that stuck with me, that and the stories I heard. So I started to work with Democrats and Republicans and we created the Children's Health Insurance Program, and it now insures eight million kids because when you get——you encounter an obstacle, you run into a problem, you've got to keep going. You can't ever stop if you're trying to accomplish something that will help other people. And I was thrilled when the president passed and signed the Affordable Care Act.

We've been trying to get that—the Democratic party has been trying to get that accomplished since Harry Truman. And now, I meet people all the time who are benefiting from it. I want to build on it and I want to improve it. You know, the Republicans want to repeal it, and that's what they'll do if they get the White House back. We can't let that happen.

Here is what I want to do. I want to decrease costs, out-of-pocket costs; decrease prescription drug costs. 

I want to make sure that we get the authority for Medicare to negotiate for lower drug costs with the drug companies. I want to go after the predatory pricing that drug companies are using to raise the price of drugs. I want to take away their tax benefits. They actually get a tax benefit for advertising all that stuff on TV to us that we never—I can't understand what they're talking about.

They have people walking through fields of wildflowers, walking on beaches. They have the name of the drug which, you know, is unpronounceable. And then in a low voice, under the music, they have somebody saying if you take this drug, you know, your nose will fall off. I mean, it—[laughter]—drives you crazy. And they spend more money advertising on TV than they spend on research. So we're going to go right at them. We're going to take them on on this.

But I don't want to start over, my friends. That's the disagreement I have with Senator Sanders. I want us to build on what we have and make it better, and go from 90 percent coverage to 100 percent of Americans. I don't want to start at zero and have to——fight it all over again, have to have the national battle we that we had on health care over the last 25 years. So I'm determined that we're going to make this work for everybody, and I know it's the right thing to do. And I hope that, you know, we will be able to get your costs down, your co-pays, your deductibles, what, you know, a lot of people are telling me are starting to pinch again.

I also will defend Social Security against privatization. The Republicans still want to privatize it. They're still talking about that. It's a terrible idea. And you know the worst part of the idea is they want to turn the entire Social Security trust fund over to Wall Street. That's what this is all about. Take all that money that people have been paying in for, you know, 75, 80 years and turn it over to Wall Street. I will never let that happen. That is the worst——idea that is imaginable.

I will also not let them voucherize Medicare, something else they want to do, and I will not let them privatize the VA. We have to fix the VA, but we are not going to take away guaranteed benefits from our veterans who have earned them through their service. That's not going to happen. 

And when it comes to foreign policy and national security, well, I think we have a lot to do to keep our country safe, and I have some ideas that I've been putting out based on what I did in the Senate after 9/11, based on my work as secretary of State.

It's imperative that we do everything we can to defeat ISIS, to stop the flow of foreign fighters and funding to fight them on the Internet where they're quite effective without putting American troops back on the ground in either Syria or Iraq. 

That will not happen. It's not—it's not going to happen on my watch. And then we have to do a better job working with federal, state, and local law enforcement to keep us safe at home, and we have to do a better job sharing intelligence, getting intelligence that will help us prevent attacks.

When I was a senator after 9/11, I'd be kept up-to-date on all the threats that still were facing New York, and we had a very, very dedicated group of police and federal law enforcement and everyone who worked together. But, you know, one of the best things we did was a campaign which said, If you see something suspicious or you hear something suspicious, report it. And so people were picking up the phone and telling the police or maybe calling the FBI, and it really provided kind of the—the eyes-on help that we needed. And people could then follow up, and we prevented attacks. We foiled attacks.

Well, the reason I mention that is because of this. The Republican candidates, led by their frontrunner, have been attacking Muslims, right? You've heard that, attacking American Muslims, attacking Muslims around the world. That's not only shameful, it's dangerous. We need everybody in this country to be on the same team when it comes to preventing terrorist attacks. 

And we need people who are in the community who hear something, see something to report it and not feel like they're being demonized, defamed, insulted, pushed out. And certainly, if we're going to defeat ISIS, we need a coalition that includes Muslim nations.

Now, I can tell you I built the coalition that imposed sanctions on Iran. I know a little bit about how you do this. You don't start by insulting people's religion and then ask them to be part of your effort to defeat a common adversary. 

That's not the way it works in the real world. So we have to be smart about how we protect ourselves, and that will be my highest priority.

I also want to continue to move toward comprehensive immigration reform, which I think is in the best interest of our country and our economy. 

And I want to let you know where I stand on a lot of the issues that the Republicans have taken positions on because they seem to be against so many of the fundamental rights that I support.

I am for a woman's right—a woman's right to make her own health decisions, and I am against defunding Planned Parenthood. 

I am for marriage equality and against discrimination against the LGBT community. I am against Citizens United, which is a terrible decision that has opened the doors to floods of unaccountable money from the Koch Brothers and others. And I would do everything I can to reverse that decision.

I also want to keep pushing for criminal justice reform and reform in the incarceration system. And I want to fight for common sense gun safety measures that will help keep—  —Americans safe without infringing on gun owners' rights.

We are a smart—we are a smart people. We can do this. And what I don't understand is how when we know we have, on average, 90 people a day dying from gun violence, 33,000 people a year, we cannot figure out how to protect people, protect first-graders going to school, people going to a movie theater, churchgoers going to Bible study. We can do this. We can't stop every murder or every suicide or every tragic, avoidable accident, but we can stop a lot of them without infringing on anybody's rights.

And 92 percent of the American people agree with that, and 85 percent of gun owners agree with that. So we need somebody who will stand up to the gun lobby and stop them from intimidating common sense reforms in our country. 

So we have a lot of work to do, my friends. And you have been really patient. The children who are still here have been especially patient, and I don't want to keep you any longer.

I just want to say a few closing comments, and then for those of you who want to stay, I will shake your hands and take pictures and you can ask me questions. But everybody else can go home and not feel bad about it because I need you to get up tomorrow and help work to get more people to go to the caucus next Monday. 

And, you know, I am all about—I am all about making progress against the odds. I am all about working with people. I worked with Republicans as first lady, as senator, as secretary of State. I worked to get results for the people I represented in the Senate as well as our country. I worked when I was secretary of State to make our country safe and to have our values and interests promoted. And I know how to find common ground because I've done it.

I don't think that—I think I—I do believe that probably every Republican I served with at one time or another sponsored a piece of my legislation. Actually, when I'm not running for something, they say nice things about me. [laughter]

Even in the case of Mr. Trump, they give me money because they think I'm so good as a candidate and a senator. So, you know, this is politics. This is all that that goes on.

But once the election is over, I will work as hard as I can to find that common ground, to get good things to happen for you, for your families, for your country and make it possible for young people to feel like I felt, that, you know, really the American Dream was available. You had to work for it, but if you did, you could get ahead and stay ahead. That's what I think about when it comes to my granddaughter. You know, I am the granddaughter of a factory worker, she is the granddaughter of a former president. I think it shouldn't matter. The grandchildren of everybody should have the same opportunities in our country. 

And that's what I am going to stand up for and fight for. And with your help, starting at the caucus next Monday night, that's what we will do together. Thank you all so much. 

Wow! What a night. An unbelievable night. What a great campaign. This has been an incredible honor to campaign across Iowa, with so many of you to make the case for the kind of future we want.
For the Democratic Party and for the United States of America. There is so much at stake in this election, I don't need to tell you. Every single one of you who came out for me, who worked so many hours — from my young organizers with energy and passion to the families and friends across this state — I am deeply grateful.

I love all of you. Here's what I want you to know. It is rare that we have the opportunity we do now, to have a real contest of ideas. To really think hard about what the Democratic Party stands for and what we want the future of our country to look like if we do our part to build it.

I am a progressive who gets things done for people. I am honored to stand in the long line of American reformers who make up our minds that the status quo is not good enough. That standing still is not an option. And that brings people together to find ways forward that will improve the lives of Americans. I look back over the years of my involvement from the very first job I had at the Children's Defense Fund. And I know. I know what we are capable of doing, I know we can create more good paying jobs and raise incomes for hardworking Americans again. I know that we can finish the job of universal health care coverage for every single man, woman, and child.

I know we can combat climate change and be the clean energy superpower of the 21st century. I know we can make our education system work for every one of our children, especially those who come with disadvantages. I know we can make college affordable and get student debt off the backs of young people. And I know we can protect our rights, women's rights, gay rights, voting rights, immigrant rights, workers rights. I know too we can stand up to the gun lobby and get common sense gun safety measures.

And how do we do that? We do that by securing the nomination, and then we do it by winning and going into that White House as others before have, determined to push forward on the great goals and values that unite us as Americans.

I congratulate my esteemed friends and opponents; I wish Governor O'Malley the very best. He is a great public servant who has served Maryland and our country and I am excited about really getting into the debate with Senator Sanders about the best way forward to fight for us and America. In the last few weeks, we finally began to have what I think is one of the most important substantive conversations that the Democratic party could have. And I am thrilled at all of the people who are playing a part in that.

I know that we may have differences of opinion about how best to achieve our goals. But I believe we have a very clear idea that the Democratic Party and this campaign stands for what is best in America. And we have to be united. When it is all said and done, we have to be united.

A Republican vision and candidates that would drive us apart and divide us. That is not who we are, my friends. I follow their candidates very closely, I understand what they're appealing to, and I intend to stand against it. I will not — I will not let their decisiveness, their efforts to rip away the progress that we've made, be successful. Because we can't afford that. As I stand here tonight, breathing a big sigh of relief, thank you, Iowa. I want you to know, I will keep doing what I have done my entire life.

I will keep standing up for you. I will keep fighting for you. I will always work to achieve the America that I believe in, where the promise of that dream that we hold out to our children and our grandchildren never fades, but inspires generations to come. Join me, let's go win the nomination. Thank you all and God bless you.

Well, they're very important to me as well. There's nothing more important, and you know, ever since I became a Senator from New York, your state and mine, I have worried about 9/11 and terrorism and Afghanistan and Iraq. I have said many times that, if we had known then, when the president came to the Congress to ask for authority to pursue what he said would be an effort to contain Saddam Hussein and put inspectors in to make sure that he didn't have weapons of mass destruction, if we had known everything that we now know, the president would never have asked for such authority, and the Congress would never have voted to give it to him. And I certainly would not have voted to do so.

But all these years later, we are faced with a very dangerous situation, and what I've tried to focus on, starting, you know, shortly after the invasion, when I began pointing out the problem saw and raising questions about the policy that was being pursued from my position on the armed Armed Services Committee, we have to make better decisions now than this President was made in the past. That's why I went again, my third trip to Afghanistan and Iraq last weekend, and I tried to make my own assessment. And when I returned, I reaffirmed my opposition to the President's strategy of escalation, putting March American troops into Baghdad, into Iraq.

Instead, I think we should cap the number of troops, and we should begin to put real conditions on the Iraqi government. I've said, look, I don't want to cut money for American troops. I've been to too many events and places like our military hospital in Germany, where I stopped on the way back, where I met with our wounded servicemen and women. I don't want to do anything that in any way undercuts their ability to protect themselves and to do what they need to do in the combat arenas where they are being placed.

But I do think we should threaten to cut the funding for the Iraqi Army and the Iraqi police force and the security for the Iraqi leaders, which we pay for, unless they make some of the decisions that we've been expecting them to make for a number of years. I don't understand why this president has given them such a blank check, and I think we need to make clear there is no open-ended commitment.

We need a phased redeployment of our troops. We need to try to bring them home as safely and as soon as it is possible. But let me add that America does have some remaining very vital security interests. The Al Qaeda in Iraq, they weren't there before, they are there now. They pose a threat not only to our troops in Iraq but to our friends in the region and even to us here at home. We have to make sure we do everything we can to try to prevent them from using their horrendous terrorist tactics against Americans and against other innocent people.

We also need to try to prevent Iran from expanding its influence in Iraq and in the region. And prevent its continuing effort to obtain a nuclear weapon which would be so dangerous not only to the region but also to Israel and our country and really to the stability of the world. So, yes, I would certainly, you know, wish that we didn't have the situation we face now, but I'm going to continue to do what I can to try to be as responsible as possible to get our troops home but also to deal with the dangers that have been unleashed there.

 It ranks very high. I spent many years having a wonderful life in Arkansas, and my husband and I used to go to New Orleans. And so I've walked those streets. I have had many friends who have lived and worked in New Orleans. When I went down to visit after the horrors of Katrina and Rita, I was just heartbroken to see the devastation.

I don't believe that this president and our government have responded as I would want them to. They have not put in the effort, the money, the attention, and focus that the people in New Orleans and in the surrounding parishes and along the Gulf Coast deserve. So this is a high priority for me.

You know, it's really unimaginable that our country would turn its back on the people who suffered so much. These are our fellow Americans. Many of them don't feel they can even go back home, and I meet people all the time who they themselves and their families are still dislocated.

It's tragic that we had such a poorly organized half-hearted response continue to this day to fail the people in the Gulf Coast area. So I'm going to do everything I can, first from my position as Senator, and then, I hope, as your President, to try to make good to the people who have unfortunately been so disappointed and let down.

Matty, you live very near where Bill and I live in Chappaqua. You're just right up the road.

There's no guide book for someone who wants to go into political life. I didn't think I'd ever personally run for office, but I'd always worked in campaigns and believe strongly in doing my part to help our democracy work.

I guess my advice would be do what you love. Do what really makes you happy. For me, when I was growing up, I wanted to help people. I particularly wanted to help children when I was in college and then in law school, I spent a lot of time studying about the best ways to help kids. And then I did, you know, work when I was in law school with children who were abused and neglected and tried to think of ways that I could be of help. And I worked for the Children's Defense Fund.

You know, through that, I really was exposed to a lot of the problems that I frankly didn't see when I was growing up. I had a very nice middle class upbringing in a suburb of Chicago. And I think, if you can get out and learn more about the world and volunteer to help people. I did that through my church when I was growing up. And any way that you can expand your horizons because every one of us is somewhat limited by the family we're born into and the experiences we have and where we go to school. And I think today, more than ever, we need young people like yourself who's really going to learn about the world and understand what you can do to make a contribution.

And I would also just really recommend just study what you're interested in, learn as much as you can, and volunteer in campaigns. You know, you're in Armonk, I hope you'll volunteer in my campaign because you get to see firsthand how our system works. I wish you a lot of luck with your life as you go forward. And just keep dreaming big dreams because we need young people who care a lot about what's going to happen in the future.

Debra, I hear about that from so many people, particularly people like yourself who are self-employed, working for small employers who don't offer health insurance. I remain committed to providing quality affordable health care for every American.

Now, some people might say, well, Senator, didn't you try that before, you know, back in 1993 and 1994? And I did. I worked at my husband's request to try to see if we could do what was necessary to create a system that everybody could be part of. And we were not successful, and we made a bunch of mistakes, and I've learned from all of that. And I have the scars to show what we went through.

And back then, I'm not sure that enough people really accepted the fact that what we'd always had was just no longer going to be successful in a new global economy where our businesses are competing with companies and countries that don't have to provide health insurance or where everybody has to offer it so that, you know, everybody's in it together. So I'm determined to work toward this.

But what I've been encouraged about, Debra, is that for the first time in the last several months, people are really focused on this. We've got businesses talking with labor unions, talking, you know, with community people, talking with doctors and nurses and hospitals. And everybody's coming together.

All levels of business, all levels of government. And so I'm very encouraged that we're going to do what Americans do best when we finally roll up our sleeves and say, look, we've got a problem. It's a problem of cost because, as you say, it's too expensive. It's a problem of competition because we are losing jobs in America, because we haven't figured out how to make quality health care affordable and available to everyone. And it's also a question of will. You know, political will. Are we going to roll up our sleeves and do this? And I think we will.

So I'm sure going to be campaigning about it around the country. I'm going to be asking people in these conversations to give me their ideas, what they think would work, and I sure hope that, you know, you're going to be able to have affordable health care. One of my ideas that specifically would affect someone in your age category, which is my age category, is to let people who don't have insurance between 55 and 65 buy into Medicare. That's one idea that we've had floated around that we could look at.

Or buy into the federal employee health benefits plan, which is what takes care of Senators like me. So a lot of good ideas, but I'm determined that we're going to come up with a better system so that I don't have to hear the stories that I hear about people who are really left out, bankrupted, denied medical care when they need it most.

New Rochelle is another neighbor of mine. We're both outside of New York City. As you know living in New Rochelle, we went through such a horrible time after 9/11. Every one of us in the greater New York area knew somebody who was affected. That gives us perhaps a keener awareness of the dangers we face.

Sometimes it can seem like 9/11 was a long time ago or a very long way away. When I travel around the country and talk to people who weren't there, weren't affected. But just this morning, I was at Ground Zero with victims who had been afflicted by the toxic dust that was released because of the collapse of the World Trade Center buildings.

We have people dying. We have people unable to breathe. We have a retired NYPD officer fighting for his life in one of our hospitals right now. His son is going to be my guest at the State of the Union tomorrow night.

So 9/11 and the threat of terrorism is never very far away from my mind. And I intend to do everything I can for us to remain vigilant and prepared. We've made some progress in the last year since 9/11, but not nearly enough. Our system is not as focused on the threats we face as I would like it to be. And I want to continue to advocate for more resources and better funding and more personnel to protect our borders, our ports, our mass transit systems.

We've done a good job on passenger aircraft but not as good a job on all of the materials, the freight that is shipped by air. We need to be vigilant about who's coming in and out of our country. We try to stop terrorism wherever we can beyond our borders by having better cooperation with people around the world. So this is a primary goal of mine, to make sure that we are as well prepared as possible.

I can't sit here tonight and tell you that there will never be another attack although I pray there will not be. But we want to know that we've done everything we can to prevent that from ever happening to anyone again. The scars of 9/11 and the lives of the people that I serve and represent in New York are still present every single day, and it remains, you know, my primary obligation to make sure that we take care of those who were affected and their families and do everything I can to prevent that from happening anywhere in our country again.

Linda, I do. It's probably longer and more wonkish than I can tell you in a brief web chat, but just briefly, let me say that I've put on my web site a lot of the legislation that I've championed and my plans for how we decrease our dependence on foreign oil.

You know, obviously, this is a security issue as well as a jobs issue. Securitywise, we know that, if we don't move away from our dependence on foreign oil, we are literally over the barrel. From people who do not wish us well and not just in the Middle East and not just places like Iran, but Venezuela. And we're also at the mercy of very unstable regimes than other parts of the world.

So I don't think there's a higher security priority, and the previous question about terrorism goes hand in hand because we can better deal with the terrorist threats we face if we are not funding them through all kinds of means where they get money that literally comes out of our pocket because we are so dependent upon the natural resource that they have in abundance. So we also, though, need to look at this as a jobs issue.

We need to create new and good-paying jobs in America. And alternative energy. What I like to call smart energy, home-grown energy, would be a tremendous way of giving a lot of our people a better future, helping them to have a more secure foothold in this very competitive global economy. So I think we've got to do more to look for alternatives. I support all kinds of ethanol. I support looking at the solar and geo thermal and certainly trying to do more on hydrogen, which are longer term goals. I think we have to do more on conservation and energy efficiency.

I'm really impressed with what California has done over 30 years. Because they have imposed conservation and energy efficiency standards, they have kept flat their energy use, and the rest of the country has just, unfortunately, continued to use more and more energy. We've got to do something to make our transportation system more fuel efficient.

And although there are some who think it's, you know, a difficult problem, I would like to see us approach the question of how we can use the great coal reserves we have without polluting the environment and adding to global change. I've asked to take away the subsidies from big oil and put it into a strategic energy fund that would be used comparable to what he did with the Manhattan Project, responding to Sputnik, the Apollo project.

Using the energy fund with a windfall tax on the oil companies taking away their subsidies, to expedite the creative genius of Americans. And I was up at a plant of GE's, their research facility, which is in upstate New York, and I saw what we can do if we use our imagination and our know-how. And I would also very much like to see us form an agency within our government that put all of this on a fast track, that went out to our universities, our colleges, our garages where creative people are thinking about how to make solar and wind and everything else much more commercially applicable. Let's put this on a fast track. There's no reason we can't do it. But the federal government has to make some investments in order for it to happen.

I think this is the most important task the next president will face, and I intend to tackle it head on. I have been fortunate over the last 15, 16 years to travel widely representing our country, to know many of the leaders that are currently running their countries and those who are coming in to power.

We have to send a clear message that the United States wants to lead the world, but we want to do it through cooperation, building alliances, making more friends than enemies. We cannot kill, occupy, jail all of the bad guys who wish us ill, but we sure can surround them. We can deter them. We can defeat them.

If we have people rooting for us, and what's happened in the last six years tragically, because the world was with us after 9/11. They were there with us. They wished us well. They wanted to be part of the fight against the terrorists. And we have so squandered that good will. And we've got to rebuild it.

And that means starting at the top with a president who will send a message to the rest of the world that we want to work together. We believe in negotiations, and we want to have diplomatic efforts. I don't understand why our current President won't talk to people that he considers bad.

I mean, look, there are a lot of bad actors in the world, but I think it's a sign of strength, not weakness, to engage in a process with these people because, frankly, you can learn something. You know, one of the first rules of warfare is know your enemy, and we're flying blind because we won't sit down and try to figure out what these people really want, who's calling the shots, how we can better deter them.

All during the Cold War, Republican and democratic presidents talked to the leaders in the Soviet union. After Richard Nixon's break through, we talked to the leaders in China. Now it's as though we are over in one point of the world and looking out and pointing fingers and making judgments. So we don't have the good will, and we are not being smart about how we can better solve our problems. So I agree that we've got to have a different approach, and I intend to do that not only through this campaign by talking about it and putting up ideas that I think would make a difference. But as President, going out there and making it clear that we want to solve problems together.

One last point about this because literally I could talk for the rest of this web chat. You know, when President Bush pulled out of Kyoto, I thought that was a mistake. But an even bigger mistake was he refused to go into any other process. If you don't like what was negotiated at Kyoto, well, don't turn your back and pretend that global climate change isn't real because it is, and it is affecting our climate, and it is going to have an increasingly big impact on how people live. So come up with a different process. But don't walk away from the problem. Just because you don't deal with the problem doesn't make the problem go away. So on that and on so many issues, we need to get back into a dialogue with the rest of the world.

You know, I hear about this problem all the time. College is increasingly expensive. Everybody knows that. And it's very hard, with the cost of everything else going up, for most middle class families to afford to save and pay for college.

You know, that means that, number one, a lot of kids don't go who would be college material because they can't afford to start. A lot of other kids don't finish because they get there and they can't afford to complete their education. And thirdly, a lot of kids go and tough it out, often working, you know, jobs, sometimes more than one job, and they get out, and they have a lot of debt, which really hangs over them, making it very difficult for them to get started with their own lives and families.

So we've got to get the cost of college down. We need much more in the way of college aid. We also need to get back to need based aid because a lot of kids who are really good prospects for college, they may not be the A student, but they're the solid B student, or they're the really hard working C student.

And now we've cut so much of the aid that used to be based on need and shift it over to merit that a lot of these kids aren't having a chance, and I don't think it's smart or fair. We also need to get the cost of college loans down, cut the interest rates. We're trying to do that in the Congress now.

But I believe this is a big problem because, if you actually look at the numbers, we haven't done that much to increase the percentage of our kids who actually graduate from college. And in a competitive global economy like the one we face today, we need to get our best educated kids out there competing. College, you know, you don't have to go to college to be a good person or to get a good job, but increasingly a lot of the jobs are really dependent upon additional education.

So I'm hoping that we'll get the costs down and we'll enable many more people to start and to finish without that huge debt load, which I would like to see much more forgiveness to if we could get kids to graduate and then go into public service jobs, take some of the jobs that we really need to have filled. We should be forgiving their debt as well.

A lot of the pensions that used to be guaranteed for people are no longer available. A lot of workers have lost their pensions because of decisions made in the corporate boardrooms, or companies have gone bankrupt and just shed all of their responsibilities to hard working employees like yourself. Social security is there.

It's an absolutely critical part of anyone's planning for retirement, and I will do everything I can to make sure it's protected and that it will be available to you and to others. But we've got to come up with some new ways of helping you save for retirement and making sure that you're not going to be left hanging, either by your employer or by your government through Social Security.

So I'm looking at some ideas about how to help you and other people who are hard working like you make investments in accounts that will be safe and will be on top of social security, that will be there when you need it, when you're ready for retirement. This is a huge issue because pension security, retirement security is something that is really part of the basic bargain that I believe we should have between our government and our people. And it's something I'm going to be focused on during this campaign.

Mr. President, we are all well aware in this chamber that our country finds itself in a deepening crisis in Iraq, and we find ourselves at a moment of decision in the United States Senate.
Nearly four years ago, our President rushed us into war in Iraq, a war now longer than American involvement in World War II, which next month will actually exceed the length of our own Civil War. For four years, members on both sides of the aisle have watched with shock and dismay as our President has made mistake, after misjudgment, after miscalculation.

Even before the invasion ended, the Administration rejected the voluminous plans drawn up by the State Department to deal with the chaotic aftermath. The successful examples of the U.S. experience in Bosnia and Kosovo during the 1990s were summarily rejected. State Department and other officials with experience in nation-building were blackballed in favor of inexperienced ideologues who were selected on the basis of political litmus tests, including answering questions about whether they were for or against Roe v. Wade and whether they had voted for George W. Bush.

Despite the urgent warnings of Army Chief of Staff Eric Shinseki and other senior military commanders, the necessary number of troops to ensure security and stability were not sent at the start of the conflict. Our men and women in uniform were ordered into harm's way without the necessary body armor or armored vehicles, a mortal error I have tried to correct time and again since I first learned of it. The strategic blunders now fill an entire library shelf of books, and they are certainly too numerous for me to list in the time allotted here.

Through these four years, there has also been another abdication of responsibility. That was the failure of this Congress to engage in its constitutional obligation of the majority's refusal to hold the Administration accountable. In the election last year, the American people decided that the status quo was no longer acceptable. So we have a new Congress, and it is past time that we in this chamber do our duty to balance the President and provide a check against his failed policy in Iraq. There is a majority against this situation in Iraq; there is a bipartisan consensus in this chamber as well. The resolution reflects that consensus as it reflects the overwhelming majority of Americans. But a partisan minority seeking to shield the Administration's continuing failure in Iraq seeks to thwart the bipartisan majority and the will of the American people.

This is not a debate about abstractions. I have seen the consequences of our involvement in Iraq, as have many of my fellow Senators. Three weeks ago, I visited Iraq to express gratitude to our soldiers, to meet with Iraqi leaders and U.S. commanders, and our troops on the ground. What I saw and what I did not see underscored my concerns. I saw American servicemen and women performing their duty admirably, but I did not see a strategy that under the current circumstances has much chance of success.

The collective analysis of our intelligence community in the latest National Intelligence Estimate is that the term "civil war" does not adequately capture the complexity of the conflict In Iraq. The bipartisan Baker-Hamilton Commission said, the situation in Iraq is grave and deteriorating. Yet the President's response to the bipartisan commission and the latest National Intelligence Estimate does not match the urgency that is described. The so-called surge is not a new strategy, but a tactic that has been tried and failed.

The absence of leadership on the part of the President leaves Congress no choice but to demonstrate the leadership that the American people and the reality on the ground demand. The previous two Congresses abdicated their duty. We must not.

Every single day, our feet sink deeper into the sands. Every day the crisis worsens. To hide from this debate with our troops in such danger is wrong, plain and simple. The crisis in Iraq has fostered a crisis of democracy here at home. The American people expect a debate. Our troops are owed a debate. And our constitution commands that we debate. But a partisan minority, acting at the behest of the Administration, is standing in the way. This amounts to a gag rule on our democracy, contrary to the national security interests of the United States.

Even though America voted for a new direction in Iraq, even though the majority of Senators oppose escalation in Iraq, we cannot get the Republicans to allow us to take a symbolic vote to condemn the escalation, much less a real vote to stop it. This resolution deserves a debate, it deserves a vote, and it deserves passage.

Now, there are those in the chamber who invokes our brave troops, suggesting that a debate on the most important issue facing our country and facing our troops would somehow undermine the mission and weaken our nation. It is a pernicious, shameful argument, and it is dead wrong. Our democracy is stronger than that, and the American people and our troops deserve better than that.

You know, our troops understand we are debating this war. We're debating it not just in this chamber; we're debating it in kitchen table conversations and around water coolers and standing in line at supermarkets. We're debating this war everywhere Americans gather. Indeed, our troops are debating this war, and the American people understand that it is the policy that undermines our national security and interests, not a vote disapproving the policy.

This debate and this resolution have merit and purpose and it will, if permitted to go forward, begin the process of changing the policy. Otherwise, why would the Administration and my colleagues on the other side of the aisle fought so hard to prevent us from having a debate and a vote? Because they understand that this will be the first step to restore our strength and renew our leadership around the world, to begin redeploying our troops out of Iraq and start on the long road to undoing the damage brought by the President, to America's leadership around the world.

If you believe the escalation is the right strategy, then cast your vote for it. But if you believe, as the majority in this chamber believe, that escalation is not the right strategy, then cast your vote against it. But standing on the sidelines is no way to stand up for the troops.

Now, there are many, both in the chamber and outside, who would wish to go further than this resolution and look for ways to bind the actions of the President and to require him to change course. I understand and agree with the frustration that has afflicted many of us in dealing with the President's policy, but if we can get a bipartisan vote against escalation, it will be the first time the Senate has exercised its constitutional responsibility to be a check and balance on the President. The first step for the Senate will be a giant leap toward accountability and toward the right end to this war.

There is a big difference between calling for the end of this war and doing the difficult, painstaking work of building the political will within the Congress to take action. We, in the Senate, entrusted by our constituents to cast tough votes, should not have the luxury of standing outside the arena and lobbing criticism from within. Once we pass this resolution, we should go further. Rather than an escalation of US troops, which will not contribute to fundamentally changing the conditions on the ground, we should put pressure on the Iraqi government in a way that they will understand there are consequences to their empty promises and their continued inaction.

Last week, the National Intelligence Council released the unclassified key judgments of the National Intelligence Estimate on Iraq. That presents the consensus views of the United States intelligence community, and it underscores the need for a political solution. The NIE States that in the coming 12 to 18 months, the overall security situation will continue to deteriorate at rates comparable to the latter part of 2006. And ot goes on further to say that even if violence is diminished, given the current winner-takes-all attitude and sectarian animosities infecting the political scene, Iraqi leaders will be hard-pressed to achieve sustained political reconciliation in the time frame of the estimate, namely, a year to a year-and-a-half. Even if, the intelligence experts argue, the escalation results in greater security, their best judgment is that the bloodshed and violence will continue to spiral out of control.

So what should we do? Well, many of us believe -- and we've been arguing for this and voting for this for more than a year-and-a-half -- that we have to chart a new course that emphasizes greater Iraqi responsibility. I still believe that is the path we should be taking. Instead, the President has chosen a very narrow course that relies heavily on American military force.

I will be introducing legislation that I think offers a better alternative. First, my legislation will cap the number of troops in Iraq as of January 1, and will require the Administration to seek Congressional authorization for any additional troops. The President has finally said this is not an open-ended commitment in Iraq, but he is providing the Iraqis with an open-ended presence of American troops.

Second, as a means to increase our leverage with the Iraqi government and to clearly send a message that there are consequences to their inaction, I would impose conditions for continued funding of the Iraqi security forces and the private contractors working for the Iraqis. My legislation would require certification that the security forces were free of sectarian and militia influence and were actually assuming greater responsibility for Iraqi security along with other conditions. We must not let US funds, taxpayer funds, be used to train members of sectarian militias who are responsible for so much of the violence in Iraq. Unfortunately, it appears that our funds to Iraqi security forces may be going to the people we are trying to restrain. A news report last week in an article entitled, "Mahdi Army Gains Strength Through Unwitting Aid Of US," reported that the U.S. military drive to train and equip Iraq security forces has unwittingly strengthened anti-American, Shiite Muslim cleric Muqtada al-Sadr's Mahdi Army militia, which has been battling to take over much of the capital city as American forces are trying to secure it. According to this news report, U.S. Army commanders, and enlisted men who are patrolling east of Baghdad said al-Sadr's militia's had heavily infiltrated the Iraqi police and Army units that they've trained and armed. Said one soldier, "they'll wave at us during the day and shoot at us during the night."

We need to inform the Iraqi government in no uncertain terms that there are consequences -- terms that there are consequences, that we will take funds away from their troops, not from our troops, many of whom still lack armored vehicles and counterinsurgency measure devices and communications equipment. And we will not fund the Iraqis if our troops are going to enter into sectarian battles where some of the participants have received American training and support.

Third, I would hold the Administration accountable for their empty promises as well. My bill requires the Bush Administration to certify that Iraq has disarmed the militias; has ensured that a law has finally been passed for the equitable sharing of oil revenues; that the Iraqi government, under American influence and even pressure, has made the constitutional changes necessary to ensure rights for minority communities; that the de-Baathification process has been reversed to allow teachers, professionals, and others who join the Baath party as a means to get a job to serve in the Iraqi government. I would also require the Administration to engage in a regional diplomatic initiative including all of Iraq's neighbors to address Iraq's future and to understand and convey clearly that the United States expects Iraq's neighbors in the stability and security of the new Iraqi state. If these conditions are not met or are not on their way to being met within six months, a new Congressional authorization requirement would be triggered.

Finally, I would prohibit any spending to increase troop levels unless, and until, the Secretary of Defense certifies that our American troops will have the proper training and equipment for whatever mission they are ordered to fulfill. Yesterday I read the classified report outlining the findings by the Department of Defense's Inspector General about the problems that have been faced by our troops getting the equipment they desperately need in combat areas like Iraq. The Inspector General did not have the full cooperation of the Department of Defense and it is heartbreaking that the Inspector General could conclude that the U.S. military still has failed to equip our soldiers in Iraq and Afghanistan, especially for the kind of warfare that they are confronting with IEDs and insurgents who are attacking them in asymmetric, unconventional warfare.

This report comes on the heals of an article in The Washington Post last week entitled, "Equipment for Troops is Lacking: Troops Must Make Do, Officials say." The Washington Post story raised serious questions about the adequacy of the supply of up-armored humvees and trucks. One of our Generals is quoted as saying that he doesn't have the equipment that our forces need and they will have to go into battle with what they have.

On my way back from Iraq and Afghanistan, I stopped at Landstuhl Hospital in Germany to visit with some of our wounded soldiers. I met with one young man who was lying in his bed with his injuries that he had suffered from one of the shape charges, these new, more advanced, more sophisticated command-controlled IEDs, the Improvised Explosive Devices. He told me that the armored fully equipped humvee that saved his life and that of the life -- the lives of his buddies who were with him. But he also told me that not everybody that he served with had that kind of protection because there weren't enough of those armored vehicles to go around.

Madam President, I do not believe that the Congress can shirk its responsibility. It is past time that we live up to our constitutional responsibility. If I had been President in October of 2002, I would have never asked for authority to divert our attention from Afghanistan to Iraq, and I certainly would never have started this war. But we are where we are, and this Congress must deliver a strategy to help us end this war in the right way and begin returning our troops home.

So on this most important issue of our time, I call on my colleagues, not to hide from this debate, but to welcome it. To welcome the opportunity to set forth whatever one's opinions might be, because this debate is about more than our policy in Iraq. It is about the role and responsibility of this august institution. Great debates in our past have not only moved public opinion but furthered the progress of our country. This debate is not merely about whether or not the President should escalate troops into Iraq, whether he has failed to grasp the complexity of the situation we confront in Iraq and to take every diplomatic, political, economic, and military strategy available to him, but it's really about our democracy itself. We should consider this resolution. And I hope that we will.

Our duty is rooted in the faith entrusted to us by our constituents and enshrined in our constitution. When we think about the patriotism and bravery, the humor and resolve, the optimism and strength of our soldiers, Marines, airmen, and sailors, our active duty, our Guard and Reserves, I think it humbles us all. But it comes out of this great democratic tradition that we are all blessed to be a part of. I hope that we have the opportunity in the next days to do our duty, just as the men and women who are serving us have done and are doing theirs.

A week ago I was privileged to go to San Antonio for the opening of a remarkable center called the Center of the Intrepid. It is a new state-of-the-art facility devoted to the rehabilitation and recovery of our wounded heroes. It was funded by contributions from more than 600,000 Americans. It was not built by our government. It was built by our citizens. It is not only going to be a place of great hope and healing for the brave men and women who have given their full measure, but it will also stand as a symbol of our democracy, of our values, of people coming together across our country; a unique partnership that you find nowhere else in the world except here. As I sat on the stage during the ceremonies for the opening of this new rehabilitation center, I watched the hundreds of young men and women who had been injured march in-- in some cases wheeled in--and take their place in the audience. I believe they are owed this debate, and certainly all those who are currently serving and the thousands who are on their way to carry out this escalation strategy deserve it even more. So, Madam President, I hope we will have a chance to express the will of our constituents, our deeply held opinions, and participate in a debate that is historic and necessary. That is the least we can do.

Mr. President, at this moment of challenge for our nation, the vantage point of this august chamber, we look onto a world filled with danger, deeply complex threats against our troops and our national interests abroad, and genuine risks to our security here at home. Keeping our nation strong and our people safe requires that we employ the best and smartest strategies available.
In confronting enemies and threats, we are fortunate to possess a great many assets, all of which we must wisely deploy, including our military, diplomatic, economic, and cultural assets. Our strongest asset remains the democracy that we are privileged to take part in as members of the Senate and as representatives of our constituents. Our democratic institutions, under our Constitution, balance one another and check against excesses and concentrations of power that help us wrestle with difficult challenges in an open and forthright way. This constitutional framework is not an obstacle to pursuing our national security, but the example that we should project to the world. Our democracy, with its tradition of accountable power and open debate, is America at its best. And that's what we need, America at our best, as we deliberately and resolutely confront the threat posed by the Iranian regime.

Now, make no mistake, Iran poses a threat to our allies and our interests in the region and beyond, including the United States. The Iranian president has held a conference denying the Holocaust and has issued bellicose statement after bellicose statement calling for Israel and the United States to be wiped off the map. His statements are even more disturbing and urgent when viewed in the context of the regime's request to acquire nuclear weapons. The regime also uses its influence and resources in the region to support terrorist elements that attack Israel. Hezbollah's attack on Israel this summer, using Iranian weapons, clearly demonstrates Iran's malevolent influence even beyond its borders. We also have evidence, although it is by no means conclusive, of attacks using Iranian-supplied or manufactured weaponry against our own American soldiers. As I have long said and will continue to say, U.S. policy must be clear and unequivocal: We cannot, we should not, we must not permit Iran to build or acquire nuclear weapons. And in dealing with this threat, as I've also said for a long time, no option can be taken off the table.

But America must proceed deliberately and wisely, and we must proceed as a unified nation. The smartest and strongest policy will be one forged through the institutions of our democracy. That is the genius of our American system and our constitutional duty. We have witnessed these past six years-- until the most recent election of a new Congress by the American people-- the cost of congressional dereliction of its oversight duty, a vital role entrusted to Congress by our constituents, enshrined in, and even required by our Constitution. So we are here today because the price that has been paid in blood and treasure; through the rush to war in Iraq and the incompetence of its execution and managing the aftermath; in the excesses of military contracting abuses and the inadequate supply of body armor and armored vehicles on the ground have led to a loss of confidence among our allies and the American people in this Administration. Therefore, Mr. President, we cannot and we must not allow recent history to repeat itself.

We continue to experience the consequences of unchecked Presidential action. Sunlight is the best disinfectant, but this President was allowed, for too long, to commit blunder after blunder under cover of darkness provided by an allied Republican Congress.

In dealing with the threats posed by the Iranian regime, which has gained its expanding influence in Iraq and the region as a result of the Administration's policies, President Bush must not be allowed to act without the authority and oversight of Congress. It would be a mistake of historical proportion if the Administration thought that the 2002 resolution authorizing force against Iraq was a blank check for the use of force against Iran without further Congressional authorization. Nor should the President think that the 2001 resolution authorizing force after the terrorist attacks of 9/11, in any way, authorizes force against Iran. If the Administration believes that any, any use of force against Iran is necessary, the President must come to Congress to seek that authority.

I am deeply concerned by the recent statements coming out of the Bush Administration. The Administration has asserted evidence that the Iranian regime's complicity, at the highest levels, for attacks within Iraq. Yet at the same time, General Peter Pace, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, questions these as assertions, in particular, the capability and intentions of the Iranian government. In this delicate situation, while making disturbing comments, [there are reports that the Administration] is sending a third aircraft carrier to the Gulf.

The President owes an on-going consultation to this Congress and owes straight talk to the country. We have to get this right. The Congress should debate our current course, including the current silent-treatment policy toward our adversaries. I believe we can better understand how to deal with an adversary such as Iran if we have some direct contact with them. I think that can give us valuable information and better leverage to hold over the Iranian regime. And if we ever must, with Congressional agreement, take drastic action, we should make clear to the world that we have exhausted every other possibility.

I welcome the agreement announced yesterday between the United States and North Korea. It demonstrates the central value of using every tool in our arsenal to achieve our objectives. I only wish the Administration had pursued this course six years ago when an agreement with North Korea was within reach. The wasted time has allowed North Korea to develop nuclear weapons in the interim. Failure to use diplomacy has damaged our national security interests. The important step forward our country has made with North Korea raises the obvious question: Why will the President refuse to have any kind of process involving Iran as I and others have urged? The United States engaged in talks with North Korea within a multilateral process, but also had ongoing bilateral discussions. We should have such a process of direct engagement with Iran, as recommended by many, including the Iraq Study Group. We need friends and allies to stand with us in this long war against terrorism and extremism, and to contain and alter the regimes that harbor and support those who would harm us. During the cold war, we spoke to the Soviet Union while thousands of missiles were pointed at our cities, while its leaders threatened to bury us, while the regime sewed discord and military uprisings and actions against us and our allies. That was a smart strategy used by Republican and Democratic Presidents alike, even though it was often a difficult one.

As we discuss potential evidence of Iranian complicity in supplying arms to insurgents, along with the refusal to suspend their nuclear ambitions, we need to deliver a strong message to Iran that we will not stand by and tolerate this behavior. However, we need to deliver that message forcefully through direct talks. The lives of American soldiers are at risk and we should not outsource our discussions with the Iranians on this and other issues. When I say no option should be taken off the table, I include diplomacy.

Currently, our intelligence on Iran is of uncertain quality. We need to examine the facts closely and carefully. No action can or should be taken without explicit Congressional authorization. And knowing what we know now, this body needs a steady stream of real, verifiable intelligence. We, in the Congress, cannot do our part in deciding what needs to be done if we do not know what is happening. And it does not appear that the administration has any real grasp on the facts on the ground, even after all these years. The public unclassified sections of the NIE report recently issued, made it very clear in their conclusions that sectarian violence would still exist in Iraq absent Iran.

So we have a lot to sort out here. We have all learned lessons from the conflict in Iraq, and we have to apply those lessons to any allegations that are being raised about Iran. Because, Mr. President, what we are hearing has too familiar a ring and we must be on guard that we never again make decisions on the basis of intelligence that turns out to be faulty. If we find evidence of potential Iranian complicity, we will take appropriate action, but that requires a partnership to defend and protect America's national security interests between the Congress and the President.

Oversight will also lead to a consensus approach that brings together the best judgments and strategies of our nation and will examine the consequences of action, the reality of any perceived or alleged threat, and the consequences of taking action. I sometimes fear that the word "consequence" has been taken out of the vocabulary of this Administration. We have to look over the horizon. We have to make hard choices among difficult options.

So, Mr. President, there are no easy answers to the complex situations we confront in the world today, but if we do face threats, then Congressional consultation and authorization will bring the American people into the debate. Whatever steps, if any, may be required should be taken by our nation, not just by our President. We must act as Americans, not as members of one party or another. Our nation has been divided by a failed policy and the relentless pursuit of it. We are facing that again with the escalation policy that the President is pursuing today.

Mr. President, if we face up to our constitutional responsibilities as the Congress, if we conduct the oversight that is required, if we exercise our checks and balances, then we are likely to reach a better conclusion than we have thus far. We must be tough and smart, deliberative and wise, and we must look at all of our assets, not just the brave men and women who wear the uniform of our country to implement the best policy. We should start by employing our best values, the democratic values that give strength to our nation and our cause, and that serve as an example and beacon to people who wish to live in peace and freedom and prosperity around the world.

Mr. President, I yield the floor.

Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. This is the day the Lord has made. Let us rejoice and be glad in it. And I want to begin by giving praise to the Almighty for the blessings he has bestowed upon us as a congregation, as a people, and as a nation. and I thank you so much, Reverend Armstrong, for welcoming me to this historic church.
And I thank the First Baptist Church family for opening your hearts and your home to me and to so many visitors today. I have to confess that I did seek dispensation from Reverend Armstrong to come because you know, I'm a Methodist. And I'm in one of those mixed marriages. And my husband, who sends greetings to all of you today, felt it necessary to call the Reverend to make sure that was all right. And thank you, reverend, for being so broad-minded and understanding.

It is also a great honor to be here with so many distinguished members of the clergy, elected officials, leaders of the civil rights movement, today, tomorrow, and yesterday. President Steele, I could have listened all afternoon. That pulse that you found so faint you have brought back to life. And all of us owe you and SCLC a great deal of gratitude.

I think everybody in the sanctuary has been introduced. But I want to just say a word of recognition to some of my colleagues in government who have traveled a long way to be here with us today. Congressman Rahm Emanuel from Illinois and his son Zach. Congressman Anthony Weiner from New York. Congresswoman Gwendolyn Moore from Wisconsin. Congressman Linda Sanchez from California. And the chair of all the mayors in the country, Mayor Palmer from Trenton, New Jersey. I thank them for coming to join with us.

And I have to say, Chairman Chestnut, thank you for the history lesson and for the welcome. I thank all of the board of deacons, the board of trustees and the deaconesses and I appreciate that we are gathered here for another commemoration that is important for us once again to re-enact so we never forget.

I also want to ask for our prayers on behalf of all those who lost their lives in the terrible tornadoes that swept through this state and others and particularly for those young people, those eight students of Enterprise High School who lost their lives, for their families, and on behalf of all those who may still be missing.

I come here this morning as a sister in worship, a grateful friend and beneficiary of what happened in Selma 42 years ago. I come to share the memories of a troubled past and a hope for a better tomorrow.

One that is worthy of the sacrifices that were made here. Today marks that 42nd anniversary. but it also marks, as we have heard, the 50th anniversary of SCLC and the 50th anniversary of the integration of Central High by the Little Rock Nine.

And I have friends with me today from Arkansas who have been with my husband and me for all those years. We know, as President Steele reminded us, that America's march to freedom, equality and opportunity has been marked by milestones -- milestones like the creation of SCLC and the integration of Central High and that fateful Sunday with that march across the Pettis Bridge. But those are just milestones. They do not mark the end of the journey. In fact, it is not over yet. and I believe that for many people today who are mistaken that Bloody Sunday is a subject for the history books, it is our responsibility to make it clear to them it is just as relevant today as it was 42 years ago.

Yes, that long march to freedom that began here has carried us a mighty long way. But we all know we have to finish the march. That is the call to our generation, to our young people. As a young girl, I had the great privilege of hearing Dr. King speak in Chicago. The year was 1963. My youth minister from our church took a few of us down on a cold January night to hear someone that we had read about, we had watched on television, we had seen with our own eyes from a distance, this phenomenon known as Dr. King.

He titled the sermon he gave that night "Remaining Awake Through a Great Revolution." some of you may have heard it because he delivered it more than once. He described how the literary character Rip Van Winkle had slept through the American Revolution. And he called on us, he challenged us that evening to stay awake during the great Revolution that the Civil Rights Pioneers were waging on behalf of a more perfect union.

It was sweeping our country, and we would sleep through it at our risk and detriment. Now, I know we've been at this a long time. And after all the hard work, getting rid of the literacy tests and the poll taxes, fighting for the right to vote, bringing more people into the economic mainstream, a body does get tired.

But we've got to stay awake. we've got to stay awake, because we have a march to finish. a march toward one America, that should be all America was meant to be. That too many people before us have given of themselves time and again, to make real. How can we rest while poverty and inequality continue to rise? How can we sleep, while 46 million of our fellow Americans do not have health insurance? How can we be satisfied, when the current economy brings too few jobs and too few wage increases and too much debt? How can we shrug our shoulders and say this is not about me, when too many of our children are ill-prepared in school for college and unable to afford it, if they wish to attend?

How can we say everything is fine when we have an energy policy whose prices are too high, who make us dependent on foreign governments that do not wish us well, and when we face the real threat of climate change, which is tinkering with God's creation?

How do we refuse to march when we have our young men and women in uniform in harm's way, and whether they come back, their government does not take care of them the way they deserve?

And how do we say that everything is fine, Bloody Sunday is for the history books, when over 96,000 of our citizens, the victims of Hurricane Katrina, are still living in trailers and mobile homes, which is a national disgrace to everything we stand for in America?

You know, Dr. King told us -- Dr. King told us our lives begin to end the day we become silent about things that matter. Well, I'm here to tell you poverty and growing inequality matters. Health care matters. the people of the Gulf Coast and New Orleans matter. Our soldiers matter. Our standing in the world matters. Our future matters, and it is up to us to take it back, put it in to our hands, start marching toward a better tomorrow!

Now, 42 years ago, from this church and from brown, brave men and women first tried to march. Two days later, Dr. King tried again. Getting as far as the bridge. Then on the third day, armed with judge Frank Johnson's order, more than 3,000 people crossed the Pettis Bridge. And by the time they got to Montgomery, they were 25,000 strong.

Now, my friends, we must never forget the blows they took. Let's never forget the dogs and the horses and the hoses that were turned on them, driving them back, treating them not as human beings.

But also don't forget about the dignity with which they bore it all. They understood the right to vote matters. Now, five months later the voting rights act was enacted by Congress and signed by President Johnson, but we all know it was written on the march from Selma to Montgomery.

It was written by men and women with tired feet and swollen ankles. And it was first signed with their blood, sweat, and tears. We cherish the few, including my good friend, Congressman John Lewis, who still remain with us today, to cross the bridge again. But let us not forget those who have passed on -- Dr. King and Coretta, Viola, Ralph Abernathy, Josea Williams and all the others. We remember, too, Jimmy Lee Jackson, whose killing near here was one of the events that ignited the march. and we were the support of this great church and of Reverend Fred, who helped to lead people into justice for all.

So many prayed and stood up for the right to vote. Dr. King said quality for African-Americans would also free white Americans of the staining legacy of slavery. And so it has. In 2000, my husband said here that those who walked across the bridge made it possible for the south to grow and prosper and for two sons of the south, Jimmy Carter and Bill Clinton, to be elected president of the United States.

The Voting Rights Act gave more Americans from every corner of our nation the chance to live out their dreams. And it is the gift that keeps on giving. Today it is giving Senator Obama the chance to run for president of the United States. And by its logic and spirit, it is giving the same chance to Governor Bill Richardson, an Hispanic, and yes, it is giving me that chance, too.

You know, this may be interesting for the legislators who are here, but before Selma and the Voting Rights Act put quality front and center, it was illegal under Alabama law for women to serve on juries. I know where my chance came from, and I am grateful to all of you, who gave it to me.

But in the last two presidential elections we have seen the right to vote tampered with, and outright denied to too many of our citizens, especially the poor and people of color. Not just in Florida, Ohio, and Maryland, but in state after state. The very idea that in the 21st century, African-Americans would wait in line for 10 hours while whites in an affluent precinct next to theirs waited in line for 10 minutes, or that African-Americans would receive fliers telling them the wrong time and day to exercise their constitutional right to vote. That's wrong. It is simply unconscionable that today young Americans are putting their lives at risk to protect democracy half a world away when here at home their precious right to vote is under siege.

My friends, we have a march to finish. I will be reintroducing the Count Every Vote Act, to ensure that every voter is given the opportunity to vote, that every vote is counted, and each voter is given the chance to verify his or her vote before it is cast and made permanent.

We have to stay awake. We have a march to finish. On this floor today, let us say with one voice the words of James Cleveland's great freedom hymn, "I don't feel no ways tired/I come too far from where I started from/Nobody told me that the road would be easy/I don't believe he brought me this far to leave me."

And we know -- we know -- we know, if we finish this march, what awaits us? St. Paul told us, in the letter to the Galatians, "Let us not grow weary in doing good, for in due seasons we shall reap, if we do not lose heart." The brave men and women of Bloody Sunday did not lose heart. We can do no less. We have a march to finish. Let us join together and complete that march for freedom, justice, opportunity, and everything America should be. Thank you and God bless you.

You know, it's hard to build the future if you don't start by honoring the past. And March is Women's History Month, a great time to remember that women's work helped build this country. It's also an important time to make sure that women's work is valued. Not just with fine words, but with fair pay.
It's been 44 years since the equal pay law was first passed, and there's been a lot of progress since then. So many barriers have been shattered. The possibilities for my daughter's generation exceed anything my mother could have imagined even when I was growing up.

But here we are at the beginning of the 21st century and women still earn significantly less money than men for doing the same jobs. Women who work full time year round earn just 77 cents for every dollar that a man makes. And for women of color it's even less. Sixty-seven cents for African American women for every dollar a man makes. And just 56 cents for Latinas.

You know, that's a huge difference every single week, when it comes to paying the rent or the mortgage, or buying groceries or school supplies, or covering the doctor's bills. Over a lifetime the numbers really add up. Working women stand to lose a quarter of a million dollars over the course of their careers because of unequal pay practices.

And this is a problem for women no matter where we work. I read a story recently that Wimbledon finally agreed to pay their women tennis champions the same amount of prize money as their male champions. It only took 123 years for them to do the right thing.

So what do we do? Well I'm introducing a new bill called the Paycheck Fairness Act to help closed the pay gap for women.

First, it offers women meaningful remedies for pay discrimination by toughening the penalties for violating the Equal Pay Act. Now that should help stop employers from discriminating against women.

Second, it makes sure our government enforces equal pay laws in our own federal contracts. Millions of women are employed through federal contracts. We should at least be a model to the private sector about giving women an equal paycheck for equal work.

Third, this bill prohibits employers from retaliating against employees who share salary information. Right now when women try to find out if they are being treated fairly by asking around about what others get paid, they can get in trouble or even be fired. This bill would make that illegal.

And finally, this bill requires the Department of Labor to continue collecting and disseminating information about women workers. You wouldn't think you would need a law to do that.

But the Bush administration has stopped collecting some valuable information about women in the workplace. As with so many things, they seem to think that the problems will go away if they make the facts go away.

Well, I want to get back into the reality business, with real solutions to the real problems people face.

That's why I'm also working to expand family and medical leave to cover sick leave; to increase funding for research into the connection between diseases like breast cancer and environmental hazards; to insure that Title IX continues, so that young women can compete.

And we also have to make sure that we stay vigilant about protecting a woman's right to choose and smart about making family planning available.

I hope you'll join this conversation about these and other important issues. This is Women's History Month, so let's keep the conversation going about women, about our past, and most definitely, about our future.

If history has taught us nothing else, it's that if we work together, we can do anything. Thanks for listening.

America's middle class, and working families, have become the invisible Americans.
If you are a hard working single parent who can't afford health insurance or a small business owner who worries about energy costs or a student who can't afford to continue college, you are invisible to this Administration. You are invisible to the oil companies earning record profits while you pay more at the pump. You are invisible to the companies who outsource your job, or lay you off or end the promise of your pension. For six long years, President Bush and the Washington Republicans have looked right through you.

If you are a first responder, worker or volunteer from 9/11 in need of medical treatment, you are invisible to them.

If you are a soldier returning from combat and waiting for treatment or disability pay, you are invisible.

If you are a child sitting in a failing school waiting for the promised federal funding under the No Child Left Behind Act, you are invisible.

If you are single mom who needs safe quality child care while you go to work, you are invisible.

And if you're a career government scientist raising the global warming alarm; a conservationist trying to protect the environment; a government accountant looking into no bid contracts that have cost the tax payers billions of dollars; even a Republican U.S. Attorney trying to enforce the law impartially - they've tried to make you invisible to the rest of us.

More than 46 million people living without health insurance. More than 90,000 people living in trailers after Hurricane Katrina. 13 million children living in poverty.

For six long years, they have all been invisible.

Well, they're not invisible to us. They're not invisible to me. And when we retake the White House, they will no longer be invisible to the President of the United States.

Hello, how are you doing? Thank you. Thank you all. Thanks so much and thanks for last night too. It's an honor and pleasure to be here this morning. It was a lot of fun to be here last night.
You know as I look around this room which is packed with people whom I admire so much, I see a lot of old friends, and it's been an honor to stand with you. We've stood together in good times and bad times. We've stood together when it seemed as though the darkness would never end and when we finally saw the light. So it is just a personal honor of the highest degree to be here today. And I want to thank also my friend and your great leader for that wonderful introduction. You know Harold and Vinny have been the heart and soul of leading this great, great union. And we've been through a lot, but the thing about going through tough times with Harold and Vinny on your side is that you know that you're not going to be alone. And that has meant the world to those of us from New York. And we have a lot of firefighters from across New York here today and I want to thank you all for everything you do, every single day.

When I think about the work that you do and the service and commitment that you have given to your nation, I know that for all of you, courage is a job requirement. You don't make this decision to be a firefighter easily or quickly. You have to think about the sacrifice and you have to think about your families. For you when you go to work, when you go to that fire house or that station these are not just your colleagues, these are members of your extended family. And I recognize how much this family, both the one that you leave at home as you kiss your wife goodbye or you tuck your son into bed are part of the commitment that you've made. And I want to also thank your family members because its not easy to see you walk out the door, to see you leave for that shift and just wait to make sure you've come home safely again. So I want to express my gratitude to your families and to everyone who love you and support you in the work that you do every single day.

You know, Harold referred to our meeting that we had on the morning of September 12. On the day before, September 11, not only our country but the entire world saw for themselves what firefighters are made of. You were the ones who ran into the fire. You were the ones who ran into the dust. Into those collapsing buildings. And for you some of your brothers and sisters it was the last time you saw them. But people who were not even on duty dropped everything they were doing to be there that day. People who didn't even work for the FDNY but who worked out on Long Island, who worked in Westchester, who worked in Connecticut, who worked in New Jersey, dropped everything they were doing. And pretty soon teams started coming from around the country. Everybody sang we want to be there, we want to watch your back, we want to help search that wreckage to see if we can find anybody still alive.

When Harold and I spoke it was a time of shock and confusion. Harold was kind enough to describe what I said to him but I want to tell you what he said to me. He said, "We will stand with New York. Firefighters across this country and even across our border to the north will be there for you." Well, Harold, you were true to your word. Not only you, but firefighters and paramedics and others poured into our city. You shared equipment with us; you raised money for us; you worked side by side with us. And you prayed with us. You were there when we needed you, and I want you to know that I will be there with you when you need me.

Now, we have to put this into a little bit of a context today. Because I know many of you including Harold and Vinny were perhaps a little unsure about me when I started running. Now that happens to me sometimes. In fact, you might recall, that back in 2000, you actually endorsed my opponent. But I never saw that as any kind of obstacle to working on behalf of your needs and your interests. Just as when I ran for the Senate in New York, I said I wanted to be a Senator who represented everybody, people who were for me, people who were against, people who didn't have an opinion. And I wanted to find ways we could move a common agenda forward. And of course, a crisis brought us all together. And we rolled up our sleeves. Over the years I've made wonderful friends with many of you. I was very proud in my last election to have the support of the New York firefighters. That meant the world to me because without fail, we have to stand together. We have a lot of big problems that we're facing, and I think we can once again reassert America's leadership at home, restore our values, fulfill the promise of America, and get back to leading the world in the right way. Now that starts with restoring what I call the basic bargain.

So many of us grew up with that. You know, we were raised to believe that if you worked hard and if you played by rules you'd be able to build a better life for yourself and your family. Well, I don't think in the last six years our country has actually been living up to that basic bargain. The leadership here in Washington seems to ignore middle class and hardworking families across our country. Under this president's leadership household debt has soared, healthcare costs have skyrocketed, assuming that you have it. Wages have remained stagnant. Now corporate profits are up. And productivity is up, which means Americans are working harder than anybody in the world, but we're not getting rewarded. I'll tell you who is getting rewarded. Companies like Halliburton are getting rewarded with no-bid contracts, then they move their CEOs across the ocean to another country and leave us hanging right here at home.

I'll tell you something else that we are going to have to deal with, the alternative minimum tax, which falls heavily on a lot of you and your families. You know, for six I've have been saying, with all due respect, do the billionaires in America need more tax cuts? Don't you think we ought to cut the taxes of middle income people, in particular those who are going to be hit by the alternative minimum tax?

You know, for six long years, our President has not seen the vast majority of Americans. Not our middle class, not our working families. He's looked right through them. To him, they're invisible. You know, if you're a child sitting in a crumbling school, you're invisible. If you're a small business owner who worries about energy costs or someone who can't afford to fill up your tank -- you're invisible. If you're a hardworking parent who needs affordable childcare while you go to work -- you're invisible. Even if you're a soldier returning from combat who needs healthcare and disability compensation, you are invisible. Well, those days are over.

When we look at the way our first responders have been treated, if you're paramedic who got sick after 9/11, if you're a federal firefighter who can't qualify for worker's compensation or disability retirement, if you're a retired firefighter who can't afford health insurance, well, you're invisible too. It's great for the photo ops, but how about taking care of the people who taken of us across our country!

Well I want to make clear today you're not invisible to the people of our country. And you're sure not invisible to me. And when we retake the White House, you will no longer be invisible to the President of the United States of America.

And I want to say in this public setting that when I'm in the White House I'm going to be there for you whenever you need me on whatever you need me for. Because there isn't anything more important to me than taking care of our first responders. It is part of our national security; it is part of our moral obligation.

And being there for you means continuing the fight to ensure that you have everything you need to do your job --the equipment, the people, whatever it takes. So let me tell you when George W. Bush tried to cut the funding for the Safer Act, which I co-sponsored, and the Fire Act, I took that personally. And with my colleagues, we fought him. And when he did it again, we fought him again. And I'm going to keep on fighting until FIRE and SAFER are fully funded, whatever it takes.

Now being there for you also means caring for every firefighter, every police officer, every paramedic, every volunteer or worker who has fallen ill in the aftermath of September 11. It wasn't just people from New York who responded that day and the days to follow and the months to follow. It was people from all over our country, and when I first visited the site, the afternoon of September the 12, I could barely see anything, the dark butt was so thick. But I could smell it, I could taste it, I could feel it. As I watched the first firefighters walking out of that curtain of darkness, covered in black soot, barely able to stand, dragging their axes behind them, I knew that the effects of 9/11 would last long after September 11.

Within days the so called World Trade Center Cough began to appear. Young men and women in the prime of their lives developed asthma and bronchitis and laryngitis, and their livers were polluted and their lungs were failing. And people who, before September 11 could lift three times their body weight, could barely stand they were so bent over in pain. They couldn't sleep lying flat in their beds anymore; they had to sit up all night long. People who used to be able to run miles without stopping could no longer breathe going up a flight of stairs.

Working hand in hand with many of you and with the IAFF we created a program to screen and monitor those who were sick. And we got $90 million to expand it. And when President Bush tried to take $125 million back, we knew we had to draw the line. And you once again came in and helped us win that fight. Let's just say the president picked a fight with the wrong people. We won it but we didn't stop there. With your help I was able to introduce legislation asking for more than $1.9 billion for medical and mental health monitoring and treatment. We're going to keep working on this, not just this year or next year but as long as our first responders, our workers, our volunteers, our residents need help.

Being there for you also means getting smart about homeland security. As you know all too well, we confront a new enemy and a new kind of warfare. It's really the warfare of cowards. It's people who sneak around and blow themselves up or place bombs in cars, who have a philosophy of nihilism. You know, they may dress it up in a kind of perverse version of religion, but it's really about destruction and death. And it is imperative that we stand against them. Their warfare is not conducted by armies or navies but by criminals, by insurgents, by militias driven by this twisted hate. And it's been frustrating for many of us because we can't get the resources to match the rhetoric. We've got a lot of tough rhetoric out of Washington, but when it comes to paying overtime, getting you the equipment you need not the equipment they want to give you, providing the money directly to local communities and not passing it through the states. Well, we haven't gotten what we know you need to protect our country.

And in this latest budget, the president is proposing to cut funds for first responders at the Department of Homeland Security to the tune of $1.7 billion. The way I see it, saying you believe in homeland security without funding first responders is like saying you believe in building a hospital without doctors and nurses. If we don't fund you, we're not funding our first line of defense, and we're going to need to work together to make that happen.

And as Harold knows, and all my folks from New York know, we have been fighting for interoperable communications since September 12. We have put in legislation. We've asked for more money, but when firefighters can't talk to police officers, when emergency responders can't talk to those form another, we not only saw it on September 11, we saw it again during Hurricane Katrina. A crisis that really, once again, put firefighters in the forefront. Just think about what's happening where your brothers and sisters are trying to operate out of trailers, and they're still using ruined equipment that we still haven't replaced.

What was a natural disaster was turned into a national disgrace, and we need to get the funds directly where they are needed. And being there for you means trying to end the war in Iraq in the right way, because firefighters have fought and died in Iraq. And we were heartbroken to learn that those who had fought and had been injured were languishing in Walter Reed. I went out there a week ago Friday early in the morning to meet with a bunch of soldiers from New York. Some of them had been tied up in the bureaucratic red tape until they were just beyond words. They couldn't figure out "what had I done to deserve this? I served my country, active duty, National Guard, or reserve. Why am I being treated like that?"

Well, the 2006 elections sent a strong message that we do not want our young men and women in uniform to be in the middle of a sectarian civil war, where they don't know who is shooting at them, and they can figure out whose side they're supposed to be on. We're trying to introduce some rationality in this, in the Congress, trying to stop the escalation because I profoundly believe that putting more of our young men and women into harm's way -- unless the Iraqis decide to defend themselves -- we cannot end this war for them. If they're not going to stand up and take responsibility, we should not lose another American life. We should end this escalation now.

I hope that the president will extricate us from Iraq before he leaves office. But let me assure you, if you doesn't, when I'm president, I will.

Being there for you means standing side by side with you in the fight for your most fundamental rights. As Harold said in his introduction, I believe that it is absolutely essential to the way America works that people be given the right to organize and bargain collectively. Nearly 90 years ago, when 36 delegates gathered for the first IAFF convention, 84 hours work-weeks were the norm, and terrible conditions were a fact of life. You know why that's no longer the case? Because of you. You organized, you unionized, you stood up for your rights. You said, "We're not going to be invisible. We're doing our part. You have to give us safe working conditions, fair treatment, and the right to bargain."

But some people still don't get it. You know they say that collective bargaining will undermine our national security. They think you haven't earned the right to organize. You know what I say to them? I say, "Would you change places? Would you go into that fire? Would you stand on those collapsing floors and under those crumbling ceilings? Well the way I see it, when you plunge head first into burning buildings for a living, you have more than earned the right to organize for better conditions on the job."

Make no mistake about it, the days of George Bush thinking the union bug is something he needs to squash are over. We are here to stand up for the rights of people who pull children out of raging waters and rescue people from flaming rooftops. We are here to stand up for the people who stand up for us. We have a lot of work head of us, and we could get some small victories along the way until we finally get the majorities we need to completely have an agenda that we support in the Senate. They can still stop a lot of what we believe in, unfortunately, but we just have to keep electing more people who see the world the way we do. And we certainly will make a lot more progress when we take back the White House.

Back after the days of September 11, so many of you came to me and said that the families of firefighters who had been killed were confronting piles of paperwork just to get the benefits they were owed. They were told it would take weeks or months, and the families didn't have that kind of time. So again, working with Harold and his team, we put together a bill, and my friend Jerry Nadler sponsored it in the House, and within a week that bill passed into law. And when the bill passed, we didn't declare victory or do some kind of big celebration, because the truth is, in the end, there was nothing we could do to give back to those families the people they had loved and lost. All we could do is to come together as a team and help as best we could. And in the end, we just followed the basic rule you live by: you never leave a brother or sister behind. Well that's how I've tried to serve in the Senate. That's how I've tried to set my priorities, and I want you to know that, if I do have the honor and the opportunity to be your president, that's what I will continue to do.

Now, people who know me will tell you I don't back down from a fight. And others use more colorful language sometimes about me. But that's just fine with me. I don't care what they say; I just care about what we do. That is what is important to me. And because I'm proud to fight for you because you fight for us, I'm going to stay on your side. I'm not in any way concerned by the fight we have ahead because I know we can win this fight. I know that if we stand together, we get our message out to America. If we steel ourselves to all of the criticism and the counter-attacks and the stereotypes and everything that they'll put out, then we'll be victorious. I have a little experience at staying the course and in sticking with people who stick with me.

St. Augustine said a long time ago that hope is really the combination of two things. It's a combination of anger at the way things are and courage to change the way things are. Well, living by hope and understanding, we can't be satisfied by what we see before us on homeland security or collective bargaining. But having the courage to step out and try to make a different future is one of reasons why I admire what you have done over the course of your work on behalf of firefighters. And I am thrilled and honored to stand with you, and together, we will make it clear that those of us who believe that courage and anger about what is, leads to hope, means that we will change America for the better.

Thank you all so much, and God bless you for everything you do. Thank you, take care.

Thank you so much. And I could not have had a better economic development partner in Upstate New York than Lee Beaulac and Rural Opportunities, Inc. We've had a lot of fun. It has been challenging and sometimes frustrating to bring people together to talk about what we were going to do to reinvest in communities and provide economic opportunities and housing and healthcare, microcredit and just a whole a range of issues that we have worked on together for the last six years. But Lee does know how the public sector and the private sector both work and he combines that knowledge with a real passion to improve the lives of people. So I want to thank you in front of all of your peers and your colleagues, someone who I am very grateful to work with and I am so pleased that he could introduce me.
I also want to thank John Taylor because the fact that NCRC is now celebrating 30 years of CRA is a big accomplishment. There were lots of times when we were checking for a pulse. Was CRA still beating? Was it going to be there as a tool that we could use for reinvestment? And thanks to all of you, it is. And we're going to strengthen it. We're going to begin to strengthen it in the Democratic Congress. And it's certainly one of my priorities because I believe in community development investment funds. I believe in empowerment zones. I believe in the tools that we know work in communities. And I was proud during the Clinton Administration to work with some of you and to visit some of the projects like the one that Lee was talking about in Newburgh. So there's a lot of work that needs to go on and we have a lot of good examples of what will make it possible for us to bring people into the mainstream economically and provide economic opportunity across all sectors of our economy and every region of our country.

And I want to thank Irvin Henderson, the chairman of the board of NCRC and all of the board members because obviously they are committed to doing what does work. And to all the New Yorkers who are here today, thank you for being partners in what we have done together over the last six years.

NCRC stands firmly behind a really simple idea that when Americans are given the tools for success, Americans succeed. You know, when the American government is on our side, we all do better together. And it is important that we renew that mission every so often because we face new challenges.

You know, when my husband started running for president back in 1992, which wasn't exactly the dark ages--some might think it was--but I know it wasn't. It was not that long ago. There wasn't really an Internet. There was an Internet that existed for scientists to communicate, but there weren't hundreds of millions of websites. We have changed so much. And we have to keep asking ourselves, what do we do to bring opportunity to everyone?

And Lee mentioned one of my projects up in the North Country of New York. And that was to put small, rural businesses on EBay. Because I said to myself, you know, there's not much of a market up here. These folks are working really, really hard and they're producing high quality products but they don't have many people to sell them to. So what we did was work with EBay to put these businesses on the Internet, help them with their websites, help them get some technical assistance so when the orders started coming in, they would know how to meet them.

Lee mentioned one of the businesses we put on, which was a soap maker. Really high quality soap, she made, in a very painstaking process that was pure and really traditional. Somebody working for Oprah came across one of her soaps and one day after she got on EBay, she gets an order for $40,000 worth of soap. She had to go out and get every person she knew in her community to come in and help her make soap. So that was a good problem to have. And that's the kind of challenges that we want to overcome by being innovative and creative together.

Well, obviously I believe in the basic bargain that I was raised with. You know, if you work hard, you play by the rules, you ought to be able to get ahead. And that's what I was raised with and I think that is at the heart of the American Dream.

Well unfortunately, we still have too much of America that is held back by a lack of capital, investment and opportunity. Middle class families and families struggling to reach and stay in the middle class are really being squeezed from all sides.

You know Americans are struggling to pay for college costs and energy costs and healthcare costs, because after all, premiums have gone up 90 percent since 2000. And I'm concerned that we're not facing the problems that we have. We're not meeting our challenges the way previous generations of Americans did.

We have 47 million people without health insurance. When you have 300 million people dependent on foreign oil; when you have more than 90,000 of our fellow citizens still living in trailers along the Gulf coast, it is time for a change and it is time for [inaudible].

I want to focus on one aspect of the American Dream, of that basic bargain, because I am worried about homeownership. And as we have seen in recent days, the basic bargain that may be breaking down is homeownership.

There has been a lot of attention recently on the volatility in the subprime housing market. But the subprime fallout takes a toll on families as well. These are not just statistics, these are flesh and blood people who are so proud of that first home, who felt like they finally had a real foothold in the American middle class that they were going to have their children in a safer environment.

Now we know that there were more bankruptcies in America last year than college graduates. And half of those bankruptcies were due to an illness and people unable to pay their medical costs.

So a lot of these new homeowners are one illness away from foreclosure. They're one job loss away. They're one, let's cut your hours away. They are hanging on. Because despite what you hear from the happy-talkers on the other end of Pennsylvania Avenue and for some of those folks they put on TV, wages have been stagnant, haven't they?

So you've got CEO pay up. You've got corporate profits up. You've got productivity up, which means that we're all working harder than ever before. But the folks who are doing the work are not getting rewarded. And a lot of those folks during the 90s, when we created 22 million new jobs and lifted more people out of poverty than at any time in our history, they felt that we and our country were on the right track, didn't they? And they thought the sky was the limit. They were going to send that child to college. They were going to get that home. Well, now we are concerned, and NCRC has been sounding the alarm to try to wake us up for the last several years. Well, I sure hope we're awake now.

You can't be surprised, can you? Because the alarm bell about the subprime home market has largely gone unnoticed by this Administration because they keep arguing we have to give trillions of dollars of tax cuts for the wealthy. They keep arguing that a $9 trillion national debt and an increasing trade deficit -- the highest in history -- are signs of increasing strength. Well, I have to say that I don't buy that. I think there are trouble signs below the horizon. Maybe they're not as obvious to some, but you keep sounding that alarm. Because I believe that we've got to take action.

According to most recent statistics, delinquent payments now affect more than 13 percent of subprime loans in our country. That's the highest level in four years. Now, many would attribute this rise to unsophisticated homebuyers, even irresponsible buyers, or the subprime market itself. But the foreclosure rate for all mortgages increased by more than 17 percent in the last quarter of 2006. That's the highest foreclosure rate in four decades.

So when somebody tells you this subprime market thing is no big deal, or maybe, you know what, let the buyer beware, these folks signed on the dotted line, it's their responsibility. Ask them why the rate for all homeowners is so high. Because the economy is not supporting homeownership the way we need it to. And after all, in the absence of an alternative, the subprime market has opened the doors to millions of families and responsible lenders and the market are rightfully casting out some of the worst actors in the subprime industry. But the market will not address the millions of families trapped in unworkable mortgages, hounded by delinquency and facing the grim possibility of foreclosure.

Now there will always be risk, and we cannot absolve it and should not absolve homebuyers of his or her responsibility. But we should make the rules clear and level the playing field.

The subprime problems are now creating massive issues on Wall Street. It's a serious problem affecting our housing market and millions of hard working families.

So what are some of the things we need to do? We need to expand the role of the FHA to issue more mortgages at better rates to these homeowners. We need to give consumers more counseling and information, prevent families from being trapped in high interest loans with pre-payment penalties and in some cases, allow more breathing room from foreclosure. This market is clearly broken and if we don't fix it, it could threaten our entire housing market, which in turn would threaten our entire economy.

So this is a serious issue and I'm so pleased to be in front of a serious group to just spend a few minutes talking with you about it.

You know, often the plight of these families are lost. We just don't focus on who they are, but we all know them. I bet if we had the people who served lunch today come in and asked them to raise their hands, you'd see folks who bought their first home, wouldn't you? Probably some in this crowd know people personally who have. And we know that very often people are paying in rent what they should be paying in mortgage to actually own something, but they don't have anyone to help them cross that bridge.

What we have to do is try to figure out how to help people who because of their credit history or a lack of savings because they're living paycheck to paycheck or for other reasons are diverted into the higher rates of the subprime market. Well that's why I think the Federal Housing Administration must be made to work better.

Because after all the FHA remains an industry leader in serving minority, first time, and low income home buyers. And it continues to help people who don't qualify for prime mortgages to avoid risky and in some cases predatory mortgage products. And, very importantly the rate of minority lending through FHA has grown to more than one in three after many years when it didn't look like that was very welcome, right?

So unfortunately the FHA's impact on the marketplace has declined, because of inefficiencies and personnel shortages, they cannot keep up with demands at FHA. In the 1990's, FHA-backed loans represented about 12 percent of the market. Today, it's closer to three percent.

This is another one of these government programs that this administration wants to starve and by doing so cut off the dream of homeownership. Now, I will soon be reintroducing my 21st Century Housing Act, which will take steps to modernize the agency by allowing the FHA to reinvest a portion of its revenues in new employees and information technology; to develop new mortgages to meet market demand and to position the FHA to work more efficiently with lenders and to serve more borrowers.

I also want to raise the FHA mortgage limits for high cost of living areas so it can reach home buyers in more expensive markets. Many people in New York cannot afford a home within two hours of where they work. If the FHA limit were higher, they could afford a home and we should make that happen.

But what if that family that we're trying to get into their home decides they will seek out a subprime loan? Well, we have to put ourselves in the shoes of a parent signing a mortgage product unaware of a complicated, escalating payment formula that has been worked out on some computer that has balloon payments and pre-payment penalties, which includes the cost of taxes and insurance, and other added on costs that the owner doesn't really understand and nobody takes the time to explain them. Clear and easy to understand disclosure, plain talk meant to inform, not to confuse must be the starting point. Buyer beware is just not enough.

So, I also propose a stop to pre-payment penalties designed to trap borrowers when payments skyrocket. These penalties apply to 70 percent of sub-prime mortgages but less than five percent of prime mortgages.

Now, we can imagine a family stuck in this subprime catch 22. A family tries to be responsible and pay down on their principal and even make payments ahead of time. But, in the fine print they learn that unlike everything else in their world, if they pay things off and get ahead, there's going to be penalties imposed on them. This is totally perverse. So they're stuck waiting for the rate to go up instead of being given the opportunity to protect themselves. And then they may very well find themselves on the brink of foreclosure.

I'm also calling for independent counseling to be made available, so when buyers like this family sign the dotted line they understand what they are signing. And as you know from your own experience at NCRC more than one third of subprime borrowers could qualify for lower rate prime mortgages, but many low income and minority borrowers are simply unaware of there options.

Finally, we also know that sometimes because of a sudden catastrophic illness or an accident that disables or injures the prime bread winner, or other circumstances, very responsible families have trouble making their payments. Now unfortunately, homeowners in distress often simply miss payment after payment and eventually lose their homes. A better alternative would be to create incentives for lenders to identify troubled mortgages and to work out solutions before foreclosure happens. Lenders might for example, give borrowers a period of a foreclosure time-out, during which borrowers will have the opportunity to put their financial houses in order and to work out a payment plan. This proposal can build on the great efforts that NCRC is already leading with your Consumer Rescue Fund Initiative. And I want to applaud you for this because this is wonderful agenda to restore the homeownership market and your network of community groups and responsible lenders and state and local governments should strengthen our ability to respond to this crisis.

But, you know, really when it comes to homeownership we should get back to that basic bargain. If you play by the rules, you can count on the rules being fair, open, and honest. And responsible lenders and community organizations need to be encouraged to really live up to their end of the bargain.

I want to see more opportunities for lenders to go into communities that have not always been well served. And I know it can be done. Several years ago, I challenged New York's credit unions to reach a goal of $100 million in responsible home loans to first time buyers in under served areas. These were areas where usually the only alternative would have been a sub-prime or risky mortgage. The result: well, a year later the credit unions all came back to my office to report that they have exceeded their goal. They announced $150 million in loans and they are still [inaudible].

I think it's also important that we look for ways for the government to incentivize these changes and to provide some kind of safety net if the worst happens and escalating foreclosures begin to mount.

You know, it's true that I travel around the country a lot now and speak in big cities and very small towns just as I did throughout my years in the Senate in New York. And there are a lot of people who are feeling less and less connected to one another. You know, it's ironic that in this age of virtual reality where people are on the Internet and bending over working their text messages and blackberries that there is a sense that perhaps we are not as secure as we once were. You know, people are working more, but their jobs are less secure. The whole family has cell phones, but finds it nearly impossible to sit down around the dinner table together. Our nation is growing more interdependent in the global economy, but increasingly feels divided here at home.

Well, I believe we can pursue policies together that lift us all up and homeownership is one piece of that puzzle. And that is why it's so important that what you're doing continues.

And the Community Reinvestment Act was a wise decision thirty years ago by Congress and President Carter. And it has made a tremendous difference. Bank lending to minorities and lower and moderate income borrowers has gone up 20 percent since then. But we still have a lot to do.

I've done a lot of work in microcredit over the years going back to Arkansas when I worked with my husband and Dr. Muhammad Yunus who just won the Noble Peace Prize for the Grameen Bank to bring Grameen Bank techniques to Arkansas. And I've been in many different settings with borrowers and lenders who are doing microcredit. I'll never forget a woman in Denver who said to me, "more dreams die in the parking lots of banks than anywhere else." We need to figure out how we're going to open up the commercial lending sector and continue to provide more alternatives as well.

And when I go out and speak with my constituents, they're not asking for a handout. They're just asking once again to be part of this great American Dream; this adventure that we are all on together. They just want the tools to help them realize their own ambitions.

Now, when I created an organization called New Jobs for New York, to try and bring more capital from New York City upstate, I went around and met with a lot of the entrepreneurs who were trying to break through and look for a chance to get the capital they needed. And time and time again there was just no place for them to go.

Well, it would be in America's interest to have a big national capital fund that would make bets again on smart people who are willing to work hard. I want to do that in the strategic energy area. You know, I meet people all over the country who have good ideas about alternative energy, but they're not getting the funding they need to translate that into reality. And when it comes to the Renewal Communities which the Clinton administration started back in 2000; well, I see the results of those investments in tourism along the Erie Canal, which had basically been just left to wither. I see those investments in the local wine industry in New York. And I think if we pursue a comprehensive agenda, urban and rural, leaving nobody out, then I think we're going to have the consensus we need in the country to start solving problems again. Because that's what I believe in.

I believe that if we put our heads together and we start looking at the facts and the evidence, and put the ideology on the back shelf somewhere, because I've never seen any ideology that helps you solve a problem, you've got to get together and see what the real facts are. And we know a lot about what works, we've just been stymied a little bit in the last six years. But we're going to get rid of those roadblocks, and we're going to roll up our sleeves and we're going to starting acting liking Americans again. We're going to start solving our problems together.

We brought electricity to rural communities, we brought interstate highway systems, we're going to bring broadband deployment so that every community can be connected up to the global economy. We're going to have a new housing project program that is going to invest in local communities. We're going to have universal healthcare coverage and we're going to use energy to create new jobs. We can do this.

Thank you all.

It is such a pleasure to be with all of you today at the Institute of Politics here at St. Anselm.
Thank you, Melissa, for that wonderful introduction. And I hope you will give me a copy of your thesis. I need to read that. Probably some very useful tips in it.

And thank you for welcoming us here. It is wonderful to for me to have this occasion to be here at the institute of politics. It is a tradition that is certainly well-known far beyond the boundaries of this state. And I commend the college for having such an active interest and involvement in the political process of our country and having excellent students like Melissa who take advantage of those opportunities. This university for over one hundred years, has been inspiring young people like Melissa and I am convinced of the quality of this school's graduates that I'm looking to hire some of them. And I have already made one hire; Colin Pio, class of 2007 even before he has graduated to join my campaign. Contingent of course upon receiving his diploma. That is the requirement for the kind of employment we are going to be offering.

I'm here this afternoon to talk about the importance of government and how we make our government work for us. Now, I know for some that might be an unusual choice of topic in the "Live free or die" state, where the general feeling is, the less government, the better. But after what I have seen the last six years in Washington, I certainly understand that sentiment.

But what I want to talk about today has nothing to do with whether our government is big or small вЂ“ and everything to do with whether it is competent or incompetent, whether it is corrupt or honest, whether it is devoted to the public interest or beholden to the special interests.

Despite their rhetoric, for the past six years, we've had an Administration that doesn't believe in less government or smaller government or better government. They simply have contempt for government. Though they lead it, they look down on it, they disparage it, they belittle it at every turn.

And because they view our government with contempt вЂ“ they treat it with contempt. Since they don't believe government can be a force for the public interest вЂ“ they treat it as a source of favors for private interests. They've created a government of the few, by the few, and for the few.

Our President has handed out jobs to his friends even when they were not qualified. Given out no-bid contracts to Halliburton вЂ“ even after they overcharged us by hundreds of millions of dollars. Fired U.S. Attorneys who tried to uphold the law. Silenced government scientists who told the truth. Retaliated against a diplomat who refused to validate fabricated evidence of WMDs in Iraq.

Really, it is a stunning record of cronyism and corruption, incompetence and deception and it has shaken the faith of many Americans in our government.

When government consistently lets us down like this, we become cynical. We distrust our government вЂ“ and grow to distrust democracy itself. We decide that politics is distasteful, and politicians just out for themselves, so why should we trust our government with our hopes, dreams and ideals?

It really is a self-perpetuating cycle. Because this Administration doesn't respect our government, they run it poorly, and it fails our people. They then point to government's failure to prove it's not worthy of respect. And this just makes it harder for us to work on the critical issues that affect people's lives вЂ“ health care, energy independence, making college affordable and so much else that people throughout New Hampshire and America talk to me about.

And today, our families are paying a steep price. Energy costs are up. Health care costs are up. Education costs are up. But wages and incomes are lagging. So while Americans are working harder than ever вЂ“ they're falling further and further behind, and we're seeing more and more inequality.

It's like middle class and hard working families don't even exist to this Administration. It's like they're invisible. For six long years, our President has looked right through them.

If you were a victim of Hurricane Katrina вЂ“ if you're one of the nearly 90,000 people still living in trailers вЂ“ you're invisible.

If you're a soldier who returned from Iraq only to be warehoused in crumbling facilities at Walter Reed, fighting to get the treatment you need вЂ“ you're invisible.

If you're a parent who can't afford childcare or a student who can't afford college, a family that can't afford to get by on the minimum wage вЂ“ while the wealthiest of us get tax cuts -- you're invisible too.

Well, you're not invisible to the rest of America. And you're certainly not invisible to me. And when we take back the White House, you will no longer be invisible to the President of the United States.

Now, we know that government certainly isn't the answer to all our problems вЂ“ that's not even close. But we also know that good government вЂ“ smart government -- can be a partner for progress. It can help us solve problems and accomplish things together that we could never accomplish alone.

We've seen this in everything from the Peace Corps to AmeriCorps. From curing diseases to building the Internet. From the end of ethnic cleansing in Kosovo to the end of religious strife in Northern Ireland. This isn't about big government or small government вЂ“ it should be about smart government.

And we all know that in order to meet the big challenges of our day вЂ“ to lift up the middle class and hard working families вЂ“ to establish universal health care, energy independence and fiscal responsibility вЂ“ to end the war in Iraq and restore our leadership around the world -- we need a government that is ready to rise to the occasion and lead us to our goals. We need to return to accountability and a system of checks and balances вЂ“ to a Congress that once again exercises oversight and accountability. We need a 21st century government to meet our 21st century challenges.

But in order to reclaim our government, in a democracy after all, our government is us. You know as Pogo once said, memorably, we've met the enemy and it is us. Well our government is us. So by denigrating our government we undermine our capacity to work together to solve these problems. So we have to change the way business is being done. And I think we start by looking at what we expect from our families, our businesses, and our communities вЂ“ and then asking ourselves, why can't our federal government do that?

You can check your bank account online. Why can't you go online and see how your government is spending вЂ“ or misspending вЂ“ your tax dollars?

You go to the ATM, stick in your card, and get money вЂ“ why can't our government transfer medical records from the Department of Defense to the VA?

You make a budget for your family, and you don't spend what you don't have or what you don't need вЂ“ why shouldn't our government do the same with our federal budget?

You trust your doctor to give you honest advice about the medicines you take -- why can't government scientists do the same when they regulate our food and drugs and study our environment?

Well, I believe our government can do all these things. And that we can be an example to ourselves and to the rest of the world. We can do it in so many ways. We can do it by leading through the government. We can be the institutional support for creating a market for energy efficiency. We can create the architecture for electronic medical records. We can provide information in a way that will enable us to do so much more in a cost effective way.

Now, I do know that people are cynical about our government and that's sort of the American birthright. But I believe that with the right leadership we can restore trust and faith in government. I believe America is ready for change. Ready for a new start. And ready once again to make this government of the people, by the people, and for the people.

We can re-establish the competence of government, the confidence of citizens in government, and the capacity of our government to set goals and achieve them.

Today I want lay out a ten point agenda to do just that вЂ“ an agenda for government reform. A plan to enhance accountability and transparency. To make government more efficient and effective for taxpayers. To restore competence and end the culture of cronyism. To replace secrecy and mystery with openness. A plan to make our government work for all Americans again.

First, we need to close the revolving door between government and lobbyists. This is exactly what Governor Lynch did during his first term in office when he created an independent ethics commission and required every member of his administration to file public financial disclosure forms.

I think we should follow his lead in Washington, and I'll start by permanently banning any of my cabinet officials from lobbying my Administration once they've left office.

We've seen the consequences of what happens when we let the revolving door keep turning. The recent Medicare prescription drug bill offers a perfect example. By the time this bill became law, many of those who'd helped to write it and pass it had left government to become lobbyists for companies that sought to benefit from it. Well, the way I see it, people shouldn't use what they've learned on the taxpayers' dime to enrich themselves at our expense -- and we're going to put an end to it.

Second, we're going to strengthen whistleblower protections so we can root out corruption and cronyism, wherever it may lie. Over the past six years, we've seen one scandal after another at our agencies, from an official in the White House doing favors for Jack Abramoff to an administrator at the Department of Education buying stock in the student loan companies he was supposed to oversee.

And while whistleblowers play a critical role in alerting us to behavior like this, our whistleblower protection laws don't give people adequate protection вЂ“ and too many are afraid to step forward. We've seen brave employees who speak up, stripped of their security clearances, pressured into resigning, or outright fired. Take the example of Jack Spadaro, a mining engineer who was head of the National Mine Health and Safety Academy. He blew the whistle on what he felt was a whitewash by the Bush Administration of an investigation into a major coal slurry spill. And he was subsequently forced out of his job. There are hundreds of examples like that.

We need to expand whistleblower protections to ensure that people who do the right thing are rewarded вЂ“ not punished. That means protecting their anonymity вЂ“ and protecting those who aid them as well. It means guaranteeing whistleblowers a true day in court. It means making sure those who are vindicated get real relief, including compensation, coverage of attorney's fees, and the option to transfer jobs. Because no one should be afraid to hold our government accountable.

Third, when I'm President, I will once again appoint the most qualified, dedicated, public-minded people to serve in government. Now, that doesn't mean that I won't appoint people who support me. But what it does mean is that this administration could have appointed well-qualified Republicans of independent judgment to positions of trust in our government. Instead, they often simply appointed their friends and supporters вЂ“ qualified or not.

A Republican partisan whose job at the International Arabian Horse Association did not prepare him for a job heading FEMA. People hired for the Iraq reconstruction team based on whether they were pro-life rather than whether they spoke Arabic. They hired scores of environmental, health and safety regulators who came from the very industries they were supposed to oversee. And they purged the professional staff at the Civil Rights division in the Department of Justice.

Well, the results speak for themselves. Tragic incompetence in the Gulf Coast. Environmental standards weakened. Corporate loopholes widened. An industry-written prescription drug benefit that bars Medicare from bargaining for lower prices. And a Department of Justice that, between 2001 and 2006, did not file a single voter discrimination suit brought by African Americans or Native Americans.

Now, we tried to change this. When we were working to improve disaster response after Hurricane Katrina, I proposed that we require proper qualifications for the director of FEMA вЂ“ something you would think you wouldn't have to write into the law. And my proposal eventually did become law. It was part of an overall reform package of FEMA. But when the President signed it, he specifically said that he wasn't going to necessarily follow the directions of having a qualified person head FEMA. He used what is called a signing statement, to pick and choose from the provisions in the law of what he would and would not enforce. We have to reign in these signing statements. The President has used them to go way beyond what any President before has ever done. And in effect to veto portions of bills that he just doesn't agree with.

Well when I'm President, the entrance to the White House will no longer be a revolving door for just the well-connected -- but a door of opportunity for the well-qualified.

And in order to attract the best people to government, I have joined on a bi-partisan basis with some of my colleagues in both the Senate and the House to propose a U.S. Public Service Academy вЂ“ an undergraduate school modeled after our military service academies that will cultivate a new generation of leaders dedicated to public service. The Academy would provide a four-year, subsidized college education in exchange for a five-year commitment to public service after graduation. It will help us produce a new generation of law enforcement officers, of civil servants of experts who will dedicate themselves to public service. We're seeing the retirement of so many people who have been doing the nuts-and-bolts work of the government for many years. And we don't see the pipeline filling with people who are willing to take these jobs. And yet I know that many young people are ready, willing and able to answer the call to serve. But they often graduate from college with so much debt that they can't imagine going into a public service career. So I hope that the Academy will open the doors much more widely for young people who want to serve their country.

Fourth, we're going to stop outsourcing our government and put an end to the abuse of no-bid contracts. Over the past six years, this Administration has steadily outsourced critical government functions to private companies, adding more than 2.4 million private contractors to the federal payroll. And today, government contractors have essentially become yet another special interest, with the top 20 contracting firms spending nearly $300 million since 2000 to lobby the government for more business to leave the government and come to them.

But these contractors, it turns out, are often more expensive than doing the work in the government вЂ“ in fact, some contract employees cost twice as much as comparable federal workers. They're often less accountable and less competent. And just think of what happened at Walter Reed, when the Army was forced to outsource maintenance to a private contract contractor. The number of people doing maintenance dropped dramatically. The contractor cut corners, fell down on the job -- and our soldiers paid the price.

All too often, this Administration has handed out government contracts without even shopping around for the best price. Today, there has been an explosion in no-bid contracting, with almost half of the $329 billion spent on federal contracts being done now on a no-bid basis. The result is fraud, waste, and abuse everywhere from Afghanistan and Iraq to the Gulf Coast.

I propose that we eliminate 500,000 government contracting positions, saving our government between $10 and $18 billion a year. And that we insist on competitive bidding for the remaining contracts, so we get the most value for every taxpayer dollar. In the rare case where non-competitive contracts might be appropriate, we'll make sure they have close oversight.

It seems as thought he motto for the Administration has been "What's a few billion tax dollars between friends?" Well, when I'm President, the days of billions in no-bid contracts and handouts to companies like HalliburtonвЂ”that in return for the work given to them picks up corporate headquarters and moves to DubaiвЂ”those days will be over.

Fifth, we're going to stop substituting ideology for science and evidence, and we're going to start giving the American people again the facts on the issues that matter to them and their families. Over the past six years, this Administration has tried to turn Washington into an evidence-free zone. Whether it's stem cell research or Plan B Contraception or pollution or global warming or the safety of our food or the quality of our air -- all too often, ideology has replaced facts, and truth has been the first casualty.

The American people deserve better than that. Way back in the 1990s, the White House had an Office of Technology Assessment that was charged with just one task: telling us the truth about science. Sorting out the competing claims and to the best of the scientists' abilities, telling us what to believe. For decades, they cut through the myths and the spin on everything from Star Wars to AIDS prevention to solar technology. It's time we put this office back in business, because our citizens should have the information they need about the issues that affect them.

Sixth, we're going to open up our government's balance sheets so you can see exactly where your tax dollars are going вЂ“ and the results they're getting. As tax day approaches, you probably find yourself wondering just where all your hard-earned money is going. Well, I propose that we require government agencies to publish their budgets and their government contracts online for all to see. So if someone tries to sneak in special favors for their special interest, we can find out about it with the click of a mouse.

And we won't just track government spending вЂ“ we'll also track results with a new America Results Initiative. With the technology we have today, we can get real-time data on just about anything вЂ“ from the purity of our water to the health of our ecosystems to the condition of our roads and bridges. We'll gather and analyze that data to see whether our government programs are effective. We'll then post it online so that our citizens can have the most up-to-date knowledge about everything from the quality of their air to the traffic on their streets. Information technology is revolutionizing every segment of society вЂ“ from business, to education, to entertainment вЂ“ and it's time that it revolutionized our government as well.

We also need to go back to doing what was done during the Clinton Administration with the Reinventing Government initiative, known as REGO, which Bill started and asked Vice President Gore to head-up. And the results were astonishing. REGO was credited with saving taxpayers more than $136 billion over eight years by cutting the federal workforce, trimming layers of management, cutting subsidies for items like mohair and wool. And so, why don't we get back to doing that again if we're serious about having a government that works, we should be constantly asking ourselves the hard questions about why we're paying for something, and whether we should continue to do so.

I also want to establish a new Corporate Subsidy Information Service. This watchdog agency will track every tax subsidy that Congress gives to big corporations. So we'll know exactly how much each company gets вЂ“ and we can track whether those subsidies actually promote results for the country and not just the company. Those subsidies are supposed to have a public good element to them. That's why we provide tax dollars, and yet too often, we have no analysis and evaluation as to whether they are really worth what the taxpayers are paying.

Seventh, we're going to make sure our government pays its bills and lives within its means again вЂ“ just like our families. That's what we did during my husband's Administration, when we balanced the budget and turned record deficits into surpluses. It took discipline and determination, a lot of hard work, but again, the results speak for themselves. Twenty-two million new jobs. The longest peacetime economic expansion in history. And the savings rate was reflected in our attaining leverage once again in the world. We've moved from the largest debtor nation to a creditor nation. Well, we're back in to the larger debtor nation again. That undermines our capacity to exercise leadership on important issues like trade and other strategic concerns. So, we need to return to the fundamental principle of pay-as-you-go.

Eighth, I want to make government more user friendly across the board вЂ“ and that starts with bringing more government services online. Last year, 73 million Americans filed their income taxes online. I want to make it possible for virtually every transaction to be paperless. Every day, Americans read the news online, shop online, chat online, and it's time that our government went fully online as well.

In order to do that, however, we're going to have to move to the ninth point of my reform agenda. We have to have government take the lead in modernizing its record keeping systems and take the lead in areas that really can change the market and behaviors to the benefit of us all.

What do I mean by that? Well, I know this doesn't sound particularly exciting, but it's really important. Because, just look at what's happening to our veterans. Just earlier this week, I spent a day in Upstate New York visiting with a lot of our wounded and injured veterans. I was at the V.A. in Syracuse, New York, and then I went up to Fort Drum, which is up in the North Country of New York. And I met with soldiers who had just returned from Afghanistan and Iraq. I met with over 40 of them who had been injured and/or wounded. And here's what they told me: their medical records have been lost.

One young soldier told me that he'd been hit by an IED on his convoy in Baghdad, which is absolutely superbвЂ”what our soldiers get at the point where they are beginning treatment to save their lives is extraordinary. We're saving so many lives that we couldn't have saved in the first Gulf War. And then as he was on a gurney as he was being wheeled to the plane to take him to the Army medical center in Landstuhl, Germany, someone came over, said, "Soldier, I'm putting this packet on your chest. It's your medical records, don't lose it." He gets on the plane. He's doped up for the long flight. They wheel him off in Landstuhl. The medical records haven't been seen since. I hear that over and over again. And when a soldier moves from being treated in Department of Defense facilities, which do provide very good acute care, to either outpatient or into the V.A. system, the records don't get transferred. The records get lost. There are so many examples of how our government is inefficient because we can't figure out how we computerize it.

Maybe some of you have read about the years of struggle to get the FBI to have a computer system that keeps track of their cases. Still hasn't happened, at the cost of billions of dollars. Well, we can fix this. We need to bring in private sector partners. We need to cut through red tape, and we need to begin to do what it takes to get our government to have information as readily available as we have in the rest of our lives.

And our government can also lead by example, by pressing national issues like energy efficiency and health care reform. I've introduced legislation to require that government buildings become energy efficient, and that new buildings which the government constructs try to attain the highest LEED standard, which is the gold standard for energy efficiency for a building. We can help to create markets with everything from new building materials to more energy efficient appliances to more fluorescent light bulbs by having the government lead by example.

And with respect to health care reform, I've also worked on a bipartisan basis to help create the framework for electronic medical records so that we could begin to realize the cost savings that would come if we have medical records that were private and confidential, with encrypted codes for access, that could be available if you were visiting New York, and you have to go to an emergency room or just visiting another doctor here in New Hampshire, and not have to go through a history again, tests you've taken before. The RAND Corporation has estimated we would save $100 billion a year in our health care system if we had electronic medical records. And the government has to lead with creating the architecture and standards for us to be able to do this, and not just create thousands of towers of Babel that can't talk to each other.

Tenth and finally, we have to reform our election system. That's where our democracy starts. We have to make sure that every vote is counted and every vote counts вЂ“ and we know that the best place to hold a government accountable is at the ballot box. Unfortunately, there's been a lot of interference with our electoral system in the last years, and there have been new requirements that have been put up as obstacles, that have really discouraged people from exercising their right to vote.

I've introduced legislation called the Count Every Vote Act, which is a comprehensive voting reform bill. It will make our voting systems more accountable and accessible. It will expand the right to vote of most of our citizens. It will create more opportunities for people to register to vote, and it will give greater assurances through paper-verified ballots that those votes will be counted. We need more oversight in our electoral system to discourage manipulation and deception. It is almost heart-breaking that I have to mention this on my reform agenda. American should lead the world in the best electoral system, using the best equipment.

A few years ago, there was an election in India. We are the oldest democracy. India is the largest democracy. They had an election, and no one predicted the outcome. Everyone thought that the then-BJP Party in power would be sent back in to power. There was an earthquake. Congress Party won the election. There were no complaints. There were no disagreements. People accepted the results, even though Indian politics can get extremely exciting. And I asked some of my Indian friends, "We've had two elections, and we've had complaints; we've had people turned away at the voting booth. We've had people misled about where and when they were supposed to vote. We've had ballots lost. How could you have done this?" "Very simple," they said. "We have turned it in to into a nonpartisan, civil service effort, where we have an independent board," like our Federal Reserve board, "that runs our national elections, and we computerized everything." So whether you were a peasant woman in Rajasthan, or a billion dot-com entrepreneur in Delhi, you voted on computers, and in order to deal with the problem of illiteracy, you had both words and pictures so that people could know who they were voting for. And your vote would be automatically recorded in the computer where you were polled and in a regional server and in a national server as a failsafe.

You know, someone after hearing that story said, well maybe we should outsource our elections to India. I mean, it's sort of is a sad commentary to think about. But here we are the leaders in all this technology. We invented it, and we can't figure out how to use it for our own purposes.

So, I'm convinced we can do everything I've outlined with the right leadership. People are ready for this change. In fact, it's the only way we can restore confidence in our government again.

Now, I know I've covered a lot of ground today, and it's not exactly the kind of subject matter that gets people marching in the streets, but if we don't restore competence in our government and confidence in our government, we will see the steady erosion of our government's capacity. There are some who argue that ideologues may have that in mindвЂ”discourage people from believing in government, render it incompetent, make people give up on this great enterprise known as our government. Oh, we'll still appropriate money for defense and homeland security but, beyond that, not much else. Well, we can reject such a cynical perspective by beginning to implement this reform agenda.

When I was working on this speech, I remembered a story that former Secretary of State, my friend, Madeleine Albright once told me about a tour she took through the Czech Republic in 1995 to celebrate the 50th anniversary of the end of World War II. In every town she visited, the Czech people were out waving American flags. But the flags had only 48 stars. It turns out that American troops had given out these flags at the end of World War II, 50 years before вЂ“ and that families had treasured them, had kept them through communists and the invasion of Czechoslovakia, and all of the problems they confronted. Through all those years of communist repression, the Czech people held on to them and to the hope they represented.

They wouldn't give up on America's ideals вЂ“ and neither should we.

It is past time that we once again have a government that works and that works for all of us. For leaders who never forget that it is your votes that put them in power вЂ“ your tax dollars that pay the bills вЂ“ your nation they are leading. It's time for a President who earns your trust and respect one day at a time. A President who never forgets that, as the great Granite stater, Senator Daniel Webster once said, "We are all agents of the same supreme power, the people."

If you give me that chance, I will be that President.

Thank you all, very, very much.

Good Morning, what a great day this is in so many ways. And I am deeply honored to be here today and to have been asked to be your commencement speaker. I want to thank President Hughes, and the faculty of this great university, the alumni, the class of 1957 and all the family and friends who are gathered here. I want especially to congratulate my fellow honorees, Dr. Frank Mason, a long time friend and real hero of mine, Dr. Roberta Flack. I am hopeful that the feeling you all have today as you walk through those majestic oaks will stay with you as you leave this university and enter into the world you have been prepared to lead and serve.
President Hughes, I'm not sure if words exist to express the gratitude this assembly feels for you today. Certainly you and your trustees led by Trustee Roche face a challenge that rarely ever has had to be confronted by any university. And to think that you just arrived at Dillard, you were just unpacking you bags, you had only been here for two months, when you found yourself at the helm of a university that was under water. But true leaders are those who rise to whatever challenge confronts them. And no one has risen higher than your President. To the entire Dillard community, I thank you for you leadership and your example.

And to the members of the class of 2007, I am very proud to be here to congratulate you on this milestone moment. The day you know that all your hard work was worthwhile, the nights you spent studying, the days you spent in class, the hours you worked to earn your tuition money.

And that's all in addition to the months you spent coping with the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina. As I walked between you, you were holding the flags of the colleges and universities you attended during the time that Dillard was so grievously struck. And I was glancing at the names that were literally all over the country. I know it wasn't easy, and I know that none of you did it alone. As your valedictorian pointed out, you were in this together, you found strength from each other, you may never have known before.

You had friends and family, teachers and preachers, administrators and staff who believed in you and sacrificed for you. They held you up when you were struggling. They would not let you give in to your fears and doubts. You are here because of them, and because as it is written in the scriptures, of their work of faith and labor of love, and steadfastness of hope. As I look out on these graduates, I see that you are the work, the glorious result of faith, love, and hope. Today, let us give thanks to all the family and friends and others that helped you along the way. Some are only here in spirit, but they are with you, they have guided you and I know that you are grateful to them.

Just think of that dark day nearly two years ago, you boarded those buses for destinations unknown, you may have wondered whether you would ever see this moment. Whether you would join all of the Dillard alumni who had marched down that Avenue of the Oaks. Whether you would ever be reunited with your faculty members that you have depended upon and learned so much from.

But while you may have been scared and uncertain, you did take a deep breath -- probably many deep breaths -- and you showed this country exactly what that Dillard University motto means: you were the living, breathing embodiment of the confidence that comes from faith.

Lifted by the kindness of strangers, sustained by the communities you found you learned what I hope was one of many lessons throughout your life about the amazing grace that brought you safe and finally leads you home.

Back here in New Orleans, President Hughes was doing everything she could to provide that home. Dillard's campus may have been uninhabitable, but that didn't stop your President. She worked around the clock, making calls, making plans, making sure all of you were OK.

And when the Spring Semester came, because of her perseverance, Dillard University had a new home -- in a Hilton Hotel.

Now, President Hughes and the faculty and the trustees and the stuff did not know whether you would come back. Whether you would be willing to pursue your studies in a temporary campus in a struggling city. She thought maybe 400 or 500 of you would return. But by the time those doors opened in January of 2006, 1,200 of you were ready to walk through. You came back.

You came because you refused to abandon this great American university and this great American city. You came back because you refused to leave behind the friends, the professors, and so many who had become your extended family. You came back because you knew that Dillard is more than the beautiful buildings and the lush green lawns and the majestic oaks -- you knew that what makes Dillard special is something no storm, no flood, or fire can ever destroy.

And because you came back, Dillard University came back as well.

You did your jobs -- you learned you taught you devoted long hours to serving your community. People and institutions in New Orleans -- and across America -- they did their jobs too. The non-profits provided desperately-needed services in terrible conditions. The churches reached out to those most in need. Ordinary citizens volunteered donated money opened up their homes and hearts. But unfortunately, the federal government did not do its job. It didn't hold up its end of the bargain.

Now federal officials did find time to track down students and demand recoupment of money they gave you to survive the storm, but in everything else from emergency response to rebuilding public works to restoring essential services, the federal government failed.

And today, nearly two years later, we still don't have a reliable hurricane protection system. We still haven't rebuilt schools, hospitals, firehouses or parks. There are more than 80,000 households living in trailers. And New Orleans is caught in a vicious cycle. Because so many people have left, neighborhoods haven't recovered. And because neighborhoods haven't recovered, many people simply cannot come back.

In short, a natural disaster became a national disgrace -- and an international embarrassment.

Let me say that again -- this is a national disgrace. Anyone who thinks this is a local or regional crisis -- anyone who thinks this is about "them," and not "us" -- is sorely mistaken. Think about how all Americans benefit from the commerce that goes through this city's port. How all of us benefit from the oil and gas produced off your shores. All of us have been enriched by the culture and legacy of this city. And when our fellow citizens hurt -- all of us hurt. Whether in Oklahoma City or New York City or New Orleans -- when Americans our fellow citizens suffer -- all of us suffer.

Today, I want to be very clear: rebuilding this city is not a New Orleans obligation or a Louisiana obligation -- it is an American obligation. And I want to spend a few minutes with you today talking about that obligation. And how we finally begin to fulfill it.

Now, as a Senator from New York after September 11, I know what it's like to stand in the aftermath of destruction so great, you can barely comprehend it, and to wonder where to even begin and whether you'll ever fully recover. But I also know about the kind of love for a city that makes you determined to not just restore what you've lost -- but to create something stronger, more beautiful, and more lasting.

I also know a thing or two about what you don't need as you try to move forward. You don't need more empty promises. You don't need more talk. You don't need more bureaucracy. If talk and bureaucracy and promises were enough, we'd have rebuilt New Orleans three times over by now.

What we do need is action. Action supported by our federal government, but driven right here in New Orleans and in the surrounding parishes. by the people who understand the reality on the ground. Action that leads to real, measurable improvements. Not six months from now, or a year from now -- but right now.

The question is, where do we begin? How do we stop talking the talk and start walking the walk? Well, I think we need a comprehensive approach -- one where the federal government responds to what our state and local leaders and residents are telling them from the point of living and working in the area. I want to commend groups like women of the storm, and by the way, I fully support their proposal to hold a debate right here in New Orleans in the fall of 2007. My good friend and colleague, Mary Landrieu, has been a passionate voice and an effective leader for Louisiana, and I have learned a great deal from her during this time. I support her coastal restoration plan. My proposals in this area build on her work, and the work of other leaders from this state and region.

My approach starts with putting one person, one accountable person in charge of recovery efforts and giving that person the authority he or she needs to do that job. Right now, the federal government's Gulf Coast rebuilding office is buried in bureaucracy at the Department of Homeland Security. Instead, there should be a Federal Recovery Director who sits in the West Wing and reports directly to the President every single week about what is happening to the people who are still suffering. And the Director's first order of business should be to reach out to every community affected and figure out exactly what they need and how the federal government can help. I don't think that communities should have to go to the federal government to beg for help -- the federal government should come to them.

Second, let's get federal money where it's needed right now. Enough with the red tape. Enough with the paperwork. Right now, communities are required to match a percentage of the funds they receive from FEMA. But we know that many simply can't afford it. When you hear people in Washington talking about all the money that's been appropriated for Louisiana, stop and ask yourself how much of that money has actually been delivered to the people of Louisiana.

So let's do for New Orleans and the surrounding parishes what was done for New York after 9/11. Waive the rule requiring matching funds to get federal money for infrastructure improvements. And, let's create a user-friendly, flexible, streamlined process to get funding for public works projects. Here's one of the things that drives people crazy, they're trying to get flood money through a program called a program called Community Development Block Grant to service the mass to get the money from FEMA, you have to get the environmental assessment. Trying to get the money from FEMA, you need to have an environmental assessment. Don't you think they could talk together and one single environmental assessment, instead of requiring people to spend 40 and 50 thousand dollars to get two assessments? This is the kind bureaucratic nonsense that has stood in the way of rebuilding. And once a community has applied for funds, let's provide a small amount of money upfront, so you can get started on their project while they're waiting for approval.

And let's come together and finally find a way to make the "Road Home" program actually work for the people of Louisiana. I was in the Broadmoor neighborhood yesterday, I met with Mrs. Johnson, a widow, raised six children in her home. Unfortunately she paid fifty thousand dollars to a contractor who turned out to be unscrupulous. And the work done on her home does not meet the standards of the city. So, she is still living in one of the trailers. How many of you have been in one of the FEMA trailers? So, you know how difficult it is. And across the street, Mr. Washington is paralyzed on one side, a retired gentleman trying to save his home. Wondering when he is going to get the help to do the work that he needs to do. It is heartbreaking to see people who are decent hardworking Americans neglected by their government. One of the things we need is more people to help.

Third, let's create a Gulf Coast Corps of dedicated men and women who would work fulltime to help our communities rebuild. Congressmen Bennie Thompson of Mississippi and other Members of the Congressional Black Caucus are working on a similar idea. I would envision the Corps having two separate parts, one that would provide financial incentives to skilled professionals -- teachers, doctors, nurses and others to serve high-need areas.

The other working hand-in-hand with the building trades union would consist of workers and apprentices who would complete priority projects. Many would be local -- and many would be able to return to get jobs that paid well,. And you could work with local communities to help restore our fire stations, the hospitals, sewers and so much else.

Fourth, let's make sure we finally build a reliable hurricane protection system for the city of New Orleans. That starts with a stem-to-stern review of the Army Corps of Engineers' plans and progress so far in building the levee and pump system. Once we're certain we're on the right track, let's fully fund the construction of this system -- and let's set a deadline so we actually get it done. We also need the Corps initiate a wetlands restoration plan, because we if we don't build up the wetlands we know we won't be able to protect the city.

Fifth, let's expand affordable housing. We know we need to provide more housing. The president showed me the housing she's already built here on campus, it looks a lot better than trailers. We also need to address the skyrocketing cost of insurance and provide more rental housing.

Next, let's deal with the rising crime rate, put more police back on the street, fund them with federal dollars. We need to make sure we have 21st century schools for New Orleans. We know there were serious problems before Katrina, and let's set the goal of making New Orleans schools the best in the country.

Eighth, let's revitalize the health care system in this city. Reopen hospitals, and let's rebuild charity hospitals, and make it simple for healthcare patients. We need to address the growing mental health crisis in the city and the area. Let's promote smart development, clean efficient energy use, "green": buildings and so much else, so New Orleans is sustainable.

Finally, we have to overhaul our nation's disaster response system. Lets start by making FEMA independent again, giving it cabinet-level position, where it reports directly to the President.Let's create a Katrina and Rita Commission modeled on the 9/11 Commission to figure out what went wrong so it will never happen again.

When all is said and done, I know how hard it is to move forward after a tragedy of this magnitude. In a tribute read at a remembrance service for British citizens lost on September 11, Queen Elizabeth wrote that "Grief is the price we pay for love." I know that today, many still grieve for those we loved and lost. For the homes and business destroyed. For the memories and heritage and history swept away in that storm.

Class of 2007, at a very young age, you have learned the hard truth that there are moments in our lifetime on this earth when, after extraordinary loss, we have no choice but to begin history anew.

I have confidence that we will choose to move forward, choose to rebuild, choose to create a new life and a new life for this great city. And I hope that one day, years from now, you'll bring your children and grandchildren here, to this city and this campus, you'll tell them about what you did in facing the great flood, and you will tell them that you love this school too much to leave it behind. I believe that is what we have to tell the people of this country about the people of New Orleans. That we need to love this city too much to not leave it behind.

And that while our government has stumbled, we ultimately found our way. And that out of the sludge and ashes and destruction of this storm, we rebuilt this city -- stronger, prouder, more lovely and lasting than ever before. Graduates, on this day, that is my wish for you. That you will live lives that reflect the courage and heroism, the bravery and determination that you have exhibited thus far in your lives. And that is also my hope for Dillard and for New Orleans.

With your talent, your dedication and your hard work, I have every confidence those hopes will be realized.Congratulations again on all you have achieved. You have made your families and all of us so very proud.

Thank you and God speed.

Thank you all very much. It is such a pleasure to be here at North Beach and I want to thank superintendent Rudy Crew. I've known the superintendent for many years, worked with him when he was in New York and am delighted to have this chance to reconnect with him here in Miami. I want to thank the principal, Mr. Luther Grey for welcoming me. I have a little personal rule when I walk into a school and I've walked into probably by now thousands of schools over the years, just to get a feeling for what the school is like and if there are teachers around, to ask the teachers what its like, ask the students, if the parents are there ask them. And the real support and enthusiasm for this school is just palpable. And I'm so grateful for all of you being here and I wanted to commend not only the principal and all of the teachers but the entire school community; students and the parents and the family members who make this school work so well. This is a gift, my beautiful, beautiful necklace from two of the pre-k students, Sofia and Savannah and it matches my jacket so I had to wear it and it has my initials, so I'm feeling very dressed up today. I'm here to talk about an issue that I've been working on for a very long time, going back to when I was in law school and became concerned about how we cared for and educated our youngest children. Because I believe that we have to do our best with our children from the very beginning.
For thirty-five years as a lawyer and an advocate, as a friend lady and a Senator and most importantly as a Mom, I have been strongly in support of providing the tools to parents that would give parents an opportunity to recognize that they are their child's first teachers and that the family is their child's first school; because we have to have a strong partnership between our families and our schools and our society on behalf of our children. I've seen what happens when caring adults come together and make a commitment to insure that each child has a chance to fulfill his or her god-given potential. Years ago when my husband was governor of Arkansas, I brought a program to Arkansas from Israel that helped to train parents -- mostly mothers and some grandmothers -- about how to prepare their own children for school. We talked to them and helped them understand the importance of reading to their children, of talking to their children, of even using household objects to teach basic lessons; the difference between a spoon and a fork, for example. Because what we knew is that when children entered kindergarten or first grade, a lot of children who had a very good basic beginning by how they were raised and what they were exposed to, were so far ahead of other children who didn't have that set of opportunities. I believe its important that we work as families to help to encourage them. To understand that things that seem very simple like talking to a child and reading to a child, lay the groundwork for brain development and for a child being able to do well later on.

I see this when I visited the Head Start programs, where children were learning to read and count and solve problems and work with each other, have a chance to develop the habits that we need in society so that people get along. We all know about the 'terrible twos' and we know about the sometimes rebellious fours and trying to figure out how to structure settings so kids can learn what it will take to be successful in this society is so important, not only for the children but for all of us. And early this morning, I was here in North Beach and met some of the pre-k children and teachers and then I just toured the three classrooms and I'm very impressed with the quality of interaction and instruction and with the lessons that children are learning. Not only the academic lessons, where I saw children circling all the letter H or all the letter G or doing the alphabet puzzles or using rhyming cards to begin to do what they need to understand words and get ready for reading, but also getting along with each other, respecting each other, something that we really need in the world today. And I think every child should have the same opportunity to learn and grow and develop at the four year olds here at North Beach are doing.

Because the fact is, we cannot succeed in the global economy today unless our children universally are given the best start in life and then can take advantage of education and enter the world ready to be productive. Obviously if you look at the entire education system there's a lot of work we have to do. We have to make college more affordable and I've talked a lot about that. We have to make it possible for our teachers to have working conditions that give them the chance to be the best teachers we can be. There's a lot of things we need to do to reform and change No Child Left Behind, which is an unfunded mandate on our school. But we all know that preparing children to attend college or to start a career, to get the skills they need, starts way earlier than that. I'm going to be proposing throughout my campaign, additional investments in even younger children; those 0-3 because parents need high quality child care and much more in the way of parental support in education about how to do best job they can. Today, fewer than 20% of our four year olds in America are in pre-K programs that are funded by our various states. That's what I want to discuss because I think our educational system needs to be strengthened from start to finish, but we have to start where it all begins.

Today I'm announcing a proposal to establish universal pre kindergarten education; access to high quality pre-kindergarten for every single four year old in America. Our children are growing up in a world that is vastly more competitive and certainly a lot more technologically advanced than when most of us were those ages. I go into classrooms and it's pretty much familiar to me because it looks exactly like looked when I was in elementary school and that was a long time ago. And we have a lot of working care, a lot of single moms supporting kids, we have a lot of differences now than what we used to have. So how do we help prepare all of our children to be as successful as they possibly can? I've talked to lots of teachers about what happens the first day of kindergarten, the first day of first grade. Some children arrive already knowing how to write their name, they know how to interact with their peers, they thrive in a structured environment. Others don't; they are not even sure of how to fit in, or what they are supposed to do. They certainly don't know how to spell their names, in fact some of them don't even know their full name because they've been called by a nick name for so much of their lives. We can't let that continue if we expect our children to be successful.

We can talk all we want about how public schools are great equalizers and engines of our meritocracy in America. But if children start school behind, it is likely they will stay behind and by the third or fourth grade they are already feeling like they don't fit in. They are not comfortable, they are being labeled failures and I don't think that's what we want for our children. Many families cannot afford the kind of pre-k program on their own that I see here in this school. Many parents struggle to try to find somebody to take care of their children in a safe environment while they go to work. During the time that I was First Lady, I hosted a White House conference on child care and one on how the brain develops because it was becoming very clear that in the first give years of life, so much of the brain develops. You don't think about that but that's exactly what's going on when children are making connections; their brains are making those connections, as well. And unfortunately we cut back in the last six years on investments in early childhood. This administration has not provided adequate funding for quality childcare; they've cut Head Start 11% in the last five years and unfortunately proposed to cut another 30,000 slots this year alone; nearly 1200 of them in Florida.

I don't understand that because I really do believe that children deserve our attention and they deserve our resources and our investment. Too many children, though, and their needs are just not being seen in Washington today. If your child is sitting in a crumbling school and I've been in those; you're invisible. If you're a single mom who can't afford safe, quality child care, you're invisible, too. If you're a family that works and can't afford health care your child needs to have his eye checked or her teeth checked, you're invisible, as well. If you're a teacher who is not getting the respect and pay you deserve from the hard work you put in, you're invisible. I think we shouldn't allow anyone in America to be invisible and in order to do that we have to change our priorities as a nation. We should start with our youngest children. A lot of people say, well that's a nice thing to do but what does that have to do with all the big problems we face in the world. In fact, some people, when I talk about the need to really help prepare children, they sort of say, well that's a nice thing to be for, but kind of soft, I mean it's not really that important, is it? But we know that it is.

Not only do we know that the brain develops in those early years and it is hard to imagine that some children come into Kindergarten or first grade knowing lots of words and knowing their meanings. That gives them a tremendous head start. Some children for whom English is not the first language, they struggle with that. So we have to work to do across the board. But it is not just the right thing to do or the nice thing to do. We now have lots of evidence from hard-headed economists that investing in early childhood makes sense. According to one study conducted by Nobel Prize winning economist James Heckman of the University of Chicago, you can close half the gaps in testing between African-American and white students that shows up at the end of high school if you have pre-school. You can also begin to deal with a lot of behavior problems that kids come into school with; these early years do not pre-ordain a child's life. Many children from difficult and disadvantaged childhoods can become extraordinary adults, but this is a critical moment in time, and we are squandering it right now. I go to schools and I see so many children who just don't fit in. They feel left out, they feel overwhelmed. Lots of times, the teachers are overwhelmed; there is not enough help in the school to give them the attention they need. So I'd like to make sure that we offer pre-kindergarten to every four-year old in America. And we should make it an offer, if not required, we should certainly encourage parents to do this and tell then what the facts are.

Children who attend pre-kindergarten are less likely to enroll in special education; they are less likely to drop out of high school. They are more likely to go on and graduate from college. They are less likely to be unemployed, and they are less likely to go on welfare. As Professor Heckman said: early learning begets later learning, and early success begets later success. And if you add up all the benefits, it's is really astonishing. Another study done by the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis show that investing in early childhood shows an annual rate of return of between 7 and 18%. In other words, you put in a dollar in early childhood, you are going to get at least seven dollars back. And imagine if you could buy a stock with that kind of return. That is why a lot of business groups including the Committee on Economic Development support universal pre-kindergarten. And it is not only for our family budget, it is good for everybody's budget. The cost of childcare, even if the childcare is frankly not that good, is pretty high these days, isn't it? And think about the savings that families could have if pre-kindergarten was accessible as public kindergarten is.

It is also important to recognize that other countries are doing this. You know, a lot of our competitors really are starting earlier because they understand that they will get better results. It is also startling to realize that many people who plan what kinds of prisons have to be built and how big they need to be say they look at third grade readings course to project how many children will grow up into trouble, teenagers and adults and end up in the prison system. And we spend a lot of money on prisons in this country. If we could avoid spending money on prisons, we could certainly make our society better, and we can pay for this by cutting back on some of the expenditures that the current administration is doing. We could consistently fail to invest in what saves us money. I remember during the 1980s, the federal government was trying to immunize children during the 1970s, and in the 1980s that was all cut back. It was an attempt to save money. But what happened is because so many children weren't immunized, there was measles epidemic between 1989 and 1991 that struck 55 000 people, killed 130 of them, many of their children and it cost the country 150 million dollars to cope with the measles epidemic.

So, it makes sense to try and prevent problems instead of paying for them. And we can do this by creating some cuts in programs that really don't add up. In all of the assessments of how much this would cost, we believe that investing in pre-kindergarten now will end up saving the government about 191 billion dollars over time, in not having as many prisons, in having more productive adults who will make more money, in avoiding the cost of illiteracy and dropouts. So it is a pretty good investment and a lot of states understand that. We have about 29 states now that invest in pre-k. And recently here in Florida, six former governors of Florida and the wife of late Governor Lawton Chiles, all sides of different viewpoints signed a letter urging Florida to make good on the constitutional amendment that the people of Florida have voted for back in 2002.

See, Florida was way ahead of everybody, and the people of Florida were really in the vanguard of this, saying let's provide a universal pre-K. And I want to start by investing 5 billion dollars in matching grant for the gold state. Now in a state like Florida which is already beginning to do this, the money would help you go to the next level, to make sure that there was a program everywhere of high quality. In order to receive the money, states would have to hire teachers with bachelor's degrees who had specialized in early childhood development. They have to develop learning standards and curricula if they don't already have them, and ensure low teacher-child ratios so that every child gets an individual attention that the child needs. And of course you would have to have to health and safety oversight that is required. I would also require states to coordinate with community based providers, work with Head Start. I am a big believer in Head Start and I had fought to protect Head Start and also, to early provide Head Starts so we can begin to help children who are particularly at risk. And if there are problems in having enough money, I would want the state to target the children who need it the most.

My daughter didn't need it. We sent her to pre-school. We had her in pre-school program because we knew it would be good for her, to have the interaction with other children, to be with other adults besides her father and me. And we had some great experiences from that. We also ran into some challenges. There is a period of time when my daughter would only eat green grapes and Jelly sandwiches. And she took a bunch of green grapes and Jelly sandwiches to pre-school every day to eat during her break. And the state was monitoring the pre-school program and they had a supervisor from the state seeing how the children were treated and at the end of the week, the supervisor said to the head teacher 'I think the program is very good but there is this one child who is really going to be poorly served. She may end up being mal-nourished because everyday she brings the same thing for lunch.' So the head teacher said, well yeah I know, that is the Governor's daughter [laughter] and that is what she is eating this week.'

Obviously, I thought it was worth doing it for my own child, and I think it is worth doing it for every child. I believe that we can increase our investments once we see that it works and when people say 'where we will get the 5 billion dollars to start this program?' There are so many to cut the money that is being spent in this government. Let's start by cutting 500 000 off the contractors that the Bush administration had added, who don't do a job that is heldвЂ¦ .I think we can find a lot of other waste. Obviously we are spending more than half a trillion dollars on the Iraq war and when we finally end that, we are going to have to start getting ourselves out of deficit, but we need at the same time to make some investment that will help keep our country strong. So I am excited about doing this. .

Years ago, my first job out of law school was to work for the Children's Defense Fund and it is one of the great jobs you could have because if you care about children's futures, if you believe it is important to do everything possible to help them, there is no better place. And the Head of the Children Defense Fund Marian Wright Edelman once said "if we don't stand for children, we don't stand for much." And I could not agree more. I saw these beautiful children here in this school today and every one of them has a divine spark inside, every one has the potential to be the kind of person that we all hope our children would grow up to be. Parents and family members have the first and primary responsibility, but then the rest of us have a role to play. That is why I wrote a book ten years ago called 'It Takes a Village', because you can be the best parent in the world and think you are doing the very best job, but your child is going to be affected by people you will know like teachers, and people you will never meet like police officers who try to keep the streets safe or people who check that the water you drink is safe. If we think about our responsibility for all our children, we will start making investments that will not only help our children but I believe really help us. So, today to stand up for our children, let's do what is done here in this school. I am looking at these young people here wearing their North Beach shirts and I am still proud that they are going to a school that really values them and appreciates how important it is that we make good investments. I am a big believer in public education and I am not giving up on public education. I think public education is absolutely essential .

And one thing people rarely talk about is when you look at test scores and analyze assessments, private schools don't do better than public schools, but a lot of people believe that because everything that happens in the public school is public information. If something bad happens in a public school, it is going to be in the newspaper, if something happens in a private school, you are not going to read about it. I think it is time that we really invest in our public schools, so let's begin by investing more in our in our youngest children.

Well, thank you very, very, much. I am delighted to be back at GW and I want to thank President Trachtenberg for his kind introduction, but he and his wife Francine have been leading advocates on behalf of higher education and so many other issues for as long as I've known them, and that goes back many years. And as Joel said, we shared the experience of our children in high school, and that was indeed an experience we both survived, so we're grateful to tell the tale.
I want to thank Dr. Williams, and, of course, Dr. Becker. I want also to recognize Russ Ramsey, the chair of the board, Dr. Scott, Dean of the Medical School and the CEO of GW Medical Faculty Associates, Stephen Badger. It is an honor to be back at GW in order to talk about one of the most important issues facing the health care community, and of course, our country.

As I travel around America, I have talked with people from all walks of life about the challenges that our country is facing: from ending the war in Iraq to ending our dependence on foreign oil -- from improving our education system to reducing our deficit. And no matter where I go or with whom I talk -- whether it's small business owners or CEOs, doctors or nurses or patients -- I hear growing concern about the crisis in our health care system: exploding costs, declining coverage and shortcoming in care and prevention.

Now, I've tangled with this issue before -- and I've got the scars to show for it. But I learned some valuable lessons from that experience. One is that we can't achieve reform without the participation and commitment of health care providers, employers, employees and other citizens who pay for, depend upon, and actually deliver health care services. I think we finally have a recognition that everyone sees there is an economic imperative to rein in costs. There is a moral imperative to extend coverage to all Americans. And, there is a practical necessity to promote wellness and prevent illness wherever possible. I plan to put those lessons to work to ensure every single American has quality, affordable health coverage.

There are three parts to my approach. First, lowering costs for everyone. Second, improving quality for everyone. Third, insuring everyone.

Today, I will focus on the challenge of lowering costs.

Health care costs are spiraling out of control. Premiums have almost doubled since 2000 -- increasing four times faster than average wages.

Every day, parents choose between paying the premium for themselves or their children. Small businesses wonder how they will stay afloat when their health care costs eat up their profits year after year. CEOs of major American companies worry about how they will succeed in the global economy when they're competing with foreign companies that spend significantly less on health care.

We spend 16 percent of our gross domestic product - $2 trillion -- on health care. And by 2016, health costs are scheduled to exceed $4 trillion, or almost 20% of GDP. That means that within less than 10 years, 20 cents out of every dollar produced in America will be spent on healthcare. No other country spends more than 12%, a difference of more than $500 billion. All other wealthy countries spend even less. We spend $5,711 per patient. The next highest spending country, Switzerland, spends $3,847 on patients. Yet, they cover every single one of their citizens and have an average life expectancy that is three years longer than ours.

Now, how have our costs spiraled out of control like this? Well, about 30% of the rise in health care spending is linked to the doubling of obesity among adults over the past 20 years. In other words, if our obesity levels had remained at 1990 levels, we would be spending 10% less on health care today -- a savings of $220 billion. About two-thirds of the rise in health care spending is associated with a rise in the prevalence of treatable disease - like diabetes, asthma and heart disease. 75% of all health care spending -- roughly $1.5 trillion -- is associated with the 4 to 5 percent of patients who have multiple chronic illnesses and require ongoing medical management over a period of years, or even decades. And 10-12% of the total health care budget is spent on end of life care.

Our administrative costs are by far the highest in the world. Today more than one in four health care dollars goes to administration. 64% of private insurance plans' administrative costs are dedicated to underwriting health risks, sales, and marketing. Every man, woman and child in America spends $412 on health care administration, nearly six times as much as other countries. According to a recent report by McKinsey, the United States spends 98 billion more than other countries on excessive administrative costs that have nothing to do with delivering good health care.

Too much of the money we spend is wasted on care that doesn't improve health. A study in Santa Barbara, California found that one out of every five lab tests and X-rays were conducted solely because previous test results were unavailable. A recent study reported in the Atlantic Monthly found that for two-thirds of the patients who received a $15,000 surgery to prevent strokes, there was no compelling evidence that the surgery actually worked.

At the same time, in situations where the benefits of intervention are clear, many patients still don't receive the care they need. A recent study in The New England Journal of Medicine found that, overall, Americans get needed care only 55 percent of the time.

If we spend so much, why does the World Health Organization rank the United States 31st in life expectancy and 40th in child mortality -- worse than Cuba and Croatia?

Our health care system is plagued with under-use, overuse and misuse. It is, simply put, broken. As President, I will make it my mission to fix it, starting by helping the 250 million people with public or private insurance who face skyrocketing costs, inadequate care, and bureaucratic obstacles to coverage.

Today, I'm announcing a seven point plan to lower health care costs for all American and again to make our healthcare system, without doubt from any corner, the best in the world. Building a national consensus around these cost savings is the first crucial step to cover all Americans with quality, affordable healthcare.

First, we're going to focus on prevention -- on wellness, not just sickness. Under my reforms, all Americans will have access to comprehensive preventive care, which will save money in the long run.

Today, we pay doctors and hospitals to treat diseases and injuries, but not to help prevent them from occurring in the first place. Only 38 percent of adults receive recommended colorectal screening, and roughly 20 percent of children do not receive recommended immunizations. In fact, our country spends only an estimated 1 to 3 percent of national health expenditures on preventive health care services and health promotion per year. That is about the same percentage we spent in the 1920s.

For example we have many more adults and young people being diagnosed with type 2 diabetes. While, the costs of caring for them are increasing exponentially, many insurance companies won't pay for someone who's pre-diabetic or who's been diagnosed with diabetes to go to a nutritionist to learn how to eat properly, to get preventive medicine or to go to a podiatrist to have their feet checked. But the companies will pay if you have to have your foot amputated. The insurance companies will actually tell you they don't want to pay for preventive health care because the patient might change insurance companies, and the original company won't get the benefits of the money they invested. But if a patient's doctor tells them that a foot needs to be amputated, well the company is kind of stuck with that. Talk about a system that is upside down and backwards.

We clearly need a new approach. We know we can save money if we give insurance companies incentives to cover preventive care and wellness services -- and my plan will do exactly that. Keeping people healthy today will not only keep our costs down in the future, but improve quality of life as well.

We know that preventive care works. I could cite thousands of examples, but just consider the following: The incidence of diabetes was 58 percent lower among adults with elevated blood sugar were enrolled in a lifestyle intervention program than the control group that was only given drugs. Among those aged 60 and older the reduction was 71 percent. And some of the research that was done leading to these outcomes was right here at GW.

Or look at what the private sector has tried to do. Safeway has made a conscious decision to focus on prevention. It pays 100% of all appropriate preventive care services, and it offers a 24-hour hotline staffed by registered nurses, and provides services to help people manage chronic conditions and incentives designed to promote healthier lifestyles.

Again, the results speak for themselves. While average costs went up 7.7% across the country. Safeway its health care costs will be flat. And they aren't the exception: Motorola's wellness initiative showed savings of almost $4 per every dollar invested.

Under my plan, all insurers who are already participating in a federal health program like Medicare or Medicaid or the federal employee's health benefit plan will have to cover prevention as a condition of doing business with the Federal government. Insurers would encourage both individuals and providers to use prevention services by paying for benefits like cancer screenings and immunizations.

My plan also pools and coordinates federal spending on prevention to help redeploy high-priority preventive services. Working in collaboration with the private sector, this initiative would pay for preventive care initiatives in schools, workplaces, supermarkets, churches, communities. It would fund and train new health prevention outreach workers, who understood the language, understood the culture of various constituencies around our country. Now, we still have so many people, and I'm sure you see it in the hospital, who come in unable to speak English, often times bringing a child to interpret. And we're just not doing a good enough job in getting information broadly available to people who need it.

Now, of course, you can have the best insurance plan in the world, but if you don't take the medicine your doctor prescribes, or follow lifestyle advice your doctor recommends, you aren't going to improve your health. If we're going to reduce costs through prevention, all of us all must take responsibility for taking better care of ourselves and I will have more to say about that later.

The second way to bring costs under control is to bring our health care system's record keeping into the 21st century, finally leaving behind paper records and outdated, obsolete, 20th century information technology. Right now, if you're rushed to a hospital with a medical emergency, they may not be able to access your medical history or to find out what medications you're taking, what surgeries you've had -- or even what your blood type is. Electronic medical records would change that.

This is also important in the event of catastrophes. After Katrina, medical records were under water, never to be recovered. A lot of people who were taking prescription drugs who fled their homes or were rescued didn't even know the names of the drugs they were taking. Only, those who had been buying drugs from drug stores that had electronic medical records could immediately access to find out what the drug was and what the prescription should be.

Modernizing our system will improve quality of care and reduce costs. Today, processing paper claims costs an average of $1.60 to $2.20 per claim. It costs 85 cents for an electronic claim. A RAND study found that, as a nation, we could save more than $77 billion annually through the widespread use of electronic medical records, and these savings could double with the addition of prevention and chronic disease management. If the use of information technology impacts our health care system as much as it has impacted other sectors of the economy, like for example, the wholesale and retail industry, we could see savings as high as $346 billion annually or over 15% of health care spending.

There is no reason why people's health files -- their test results, lab records, X-rays -- can't be stored securely and confidentially on a computer file accessible from a doctor's office or hospital. In fact, if all hospitals used a computerized physician order entry system, an estimated 200,000 fewer adverse drug events would occur, saving roughly $1 billion per year.

We can also use information technology to disseminate research. A government study recently showed it takes 17 years from the time of a new medical discovery to the time clinicians actually incorporate that discovery into their practice at the bedside. Why not 17 seconds, the moment we know the discovery improves care?

The Veterans medical system provides a perfect example of a fully automated health information system that supports the needs of patients, clinicians, and administrators. Its computerized patient record system (CPRS), contains every detail of a patient's health record, including laboratory test results, medical images, bar code medication administration, progress notes, and appointments, all accessible from anywhere within the VA system.

The VA started modernizing its programs in 1993, using health IT as well as other care management techniques. And it delivers some of the best quality health care in the United States with amazing efficiency. Between 1999 and 2003, the number of patients enrolled in the VA system increased by 70 percent, yet funding (not adjusted for inflation) increased by only 41 percent. So the VA has not only has become one of the health care industry's best quality performers, it has done so while spending less and less on each patient. Health care spending per capita averages, as I said, over $6,300 in the U.S.; at the VA, however, the per-patient cost is $5,000, and 20% lower than the national average, even though the average age of a VA patient is 60.

Last year I was at the hospital here at GW announcing legislation that has since passed the Senate that promotes the use of information technology so we can end the paper chase, limit medical errors and reduce the number of malpractice suits. It would allow us to use IT to develop a nationwide, interoperable system, to streamline our healthcare costs, and, I believe, reduce errors as well. Now, I'm proud of my legislation, we didn't get it passed in the House last year, we're going to try again this year. But if we don't get it passed, I will have it as one of my highest priorities as President. I'm going to build on that legislation by requiring health providers that participate in federal programs, which is nearly all of them, to adopt private, secure, and interoperable technology. And to help hospitals and doctors modernize their systems and promote the widespread adoption of health IT, I would invest $3 billion a year in grants to help ramp up the system. No more yellowing paper records -- no more trying to decipher messy handwriting.

Third, we're finally going to coordinate and streamline the care our chronically ill patients receive. Americans with chronic disease such as heart disease and diabetes account for an astonishing percentage. When I first saw this, I couldn't believe it----that it was 75 percent of our national health care expenditures. And improving the quality of their care will help limit costs, and improve health.

To that end, I propose establishing medical "homes" similar to those operating right now in Oregon. Dr. David Dorra, a primary care physician, spoke at the Senate Aging Committee, on which I serve, two weeks ago about the success of these medical homes. He told the story of a patient, Ms. Viera, a 75 year-old woman in Oregon who suffered from five chronic illnesses, including diabetes, high blood pressure, and mild congestive heart failure. She also had difficulties remembering what bills to pay and what pills to take.

Now, in most clinics across this country, Ms. Viera would receive care from qualified, capable doctors and nurses. But her care would likely not be coordinated -- her providers wouldn't be talking to each other, making sure that the treatments they were prescribing were working together. This ends up raising costs and increasing the chances that she will suffer complications or end up back in the hospital. Anyone who has ever tried to coordinate their own care, or the care of a loved one, knows that this is all too common situation.

Fortunately, her care was addressed comprehensively through Care Management Plus in Oregon, an IT system with trained care managers in primary care clinics to treat older adults with complicated conditions. She's is in good hands. Her care managers and her primary care physician addressed her symptoms early, preventing problems rather than treating them after they occurred. And she is helped to navigate the system.

Under this program, seniors with complex diabetes have had a 20 percent reduction in mortality, a 24 percent reduction in expensive hospitalization, and up to 42 percent improvement in control of their disease.

Every patient should have access to a system with outcomes like that. That's why my proposal would require that Americans with costly, hard to manage illnesses have access to state-of-the-art chronic care coordination models under federally-funded plans, like Medicare and the Federal Employees Health Benefits (FEHBP) plan. This proposal would permit multi-specialty clinics (GW, Mayo Clinic, Johns Hopkins, Partners Healthcare), provider-sponsored organizations and private plans to bid on and provide services such as care coordination amongst and between providers, drug management, diet and exercise control and the promotion of individual patient responsibility.

We know that this coordinated care model would result in significant cost savings. A recent RAND study concluded that chronic disease management, preceded by prevention and backed by information technology, could save $147 billion annually. Another study found this model could reduce the cost of diabetes care alone by 3 percent, saving us $4 billion dollars.

Fourth, my plan will offer will offer individuals and small businesses market access to larger insurance pools that will lower costs and end insurance company discrimination against people with pre-existing conditions. As part of a plan for universal coverage, which I will discuss in detail in the coming months, we would create large insurance pools that lower administrative costs for small businesses and individuals by spreading the risk. In a system of universal coverage insurance companies cannot as easily shift costs through cherry picking and other means.

In fact, according to a recent McKinsey report, insurance companies in America spend tens of billions a year figuring out how not to cover people -- doing complicated calculations to figure out how to cherry pick the healthiest persons, and leave everyone else out in the cold. That is how they profit: by avoiding insuring patients who will be "expensive" -- and then trying to avoid paying up once the insured patient actually needs treatment.

I see this all the time. My office spends countless hours arguing with insurance companies to get my constituents the health care they have paid for. For example, a father called me from northern New York -- his son had a rare illness. Now he and his son were well insured. He'd worked for many years for the same employer who provided a good policy. But when his son needed a special operation -- that could only be performed at one place in the country -- the insurance company said, sorry, that's out of network, we're not going to send you to have that done.

So my office intervened. And in the end they got permission for the operation. But I don't think people should have to go to their United States Senator to get their insurance company to give them what they've paid for.

As President, I will end the practice of insurance company cherry-picking once and for all by allowing anyone who wants to join a plan to do so and prohibiting insurance companies from carving out benefits or charging higher rates to people with health problems. I also will call for rating reforms to ensure that older and other vulnerable populations are not discriminated against. The whole point of insurance, lest we forget, is to spread risk across a group of enrollees. It's one of the reasons that the administrative costs of Medicare are so much lower; because they are actually insuring everyone. Everyone is in the pool, and we have to figure out how to better control the costs within Medicare but they start with an advantage because they have such a considerably lower administrative cost.

Finally, insurers would be required to prove they were spending much less on marketing and schemes to avoid providing insurance to high-risk Americans, and more on direct care-giving. Now most businesses and some states have become tough purchasers of health insurance, insisting on fair marketing and cracking down on high overhead. We should follow their lead. One of the things I've advocated now for 14 years is a common vocabulary and a common form that every insurance company must use. This sounds like a pretty common-sense idea---so you can actually compare and contrast what you're paying for---but when I proposed in back in вЂ93 and вЂ94 it was, shall we say, vigorously objected to. Because we need more transparency and we need that common vocabulary in order to get costs down, and that's opposite of what the insurers want to happen. By insuring all Americans through accountable public and private plans, we can get rid of administrative costs that do nothing but add to insurance companies' bottom line. In such a reformed system, risk would be widely spread and we could reduce administrative costs by as much as $20 to 30 billion a year.

Fifth, I will work to improve the quality of care which will also help us drive down costs. I'll start by establishing an independent public-private Best Practices Institute. This Institute would be a partnership among the public and the private sector, to finance comparative effectiveness research, so that doctors, nurses and other health professionals -- as well as consumers and businesses -- would know what drugs, devices, surgeries and treatments work best. This would reduce the use of inefficient and ineffective treatments, and I believe that it would have tremendous benefits because we could get evidence-based medicine into the bloodstream of the country much more effectively. I spearheaded a similar proposal to authorize the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality to start doing research on comparative effectiveness at the Department of Health and Human Services. Eight reports have been released and dozens more are underway.

One of the things they're finding is a lot of these so-called "blockbuster drugs" are no more effective, and sometimes less effective, in treating conditions than old standbys that have been around for a long time, and don't have all the advertising of, you know, people running through fields of wildflowers that convince patients that they need the new drug, as opposed to the one that has worked well.

Too often, doctors and patients don't know which medical interventions are most effective -- and which have little benefit. A recent study by Dartmouth researchers shows that close to one third of the $2 trillion we spend goes to care that is duplicative and fails to improve patient health -- in fact, the researchers posited that it may even make health worse. More care is not necessarily better care, and inefficient care may do more harm than good.

My plan will provide incentives to encourage doctors to keep up with the research and prescribe the most effective treatments. The University of Michigan and Pitney Bowes are doing just that -- linking out of pocket drug costs to clinical benefit for patients. The more effective the medication, the less that patient has to pay for the drug. As of 2005, Pitney Bowes had saved more than $3.5 million dollars using this method.

Another innovative idea is the Geisinger Health System's suggestion of a medical warranty: it charges a flat fee for surgery that includes 90 days of follow-up treatment. Currently, there is little incentive to seek out the most effective treatments, because if a treatment regimen or surgery doesn't work, the patient simply returns for more costly treatments. The warranty is an incentive to do it right the first time, because there is no extra billing if more care is needed. Geisinger doctors have identified 40 essential steps to bypass surgery, and they've established procedures to ensure they're always followed.

The Best Practices Institute will empower with information and evidence those who have to make the decisions. It will not only be beneficial with respect to pharmaceuticals but also medical devices and even practice protocols and I think that it will give a lot of doctor's ammunition against insurance companies, drug companies and even sometimes patients about what works better than other options. The Oregon drug effectiveness review founded by Governor John Kitzhaber in 1999, is a collaborative partnership between states and non-profits that conducts reviews of widely used drugs to promote the most effective ones. North Carolina has used such reviews to educate providers, saving the state an estimated $80 million in 2003 alone. Now I can't extrapolate how much we would save as a nation, but I believe it would obviously be in the billions.

Sixth, if we want to get health care costs under control, we need to get prescription drug costs under control. We know that Americans pay the highest prices in the world for prescription drugs that we have already in most instances funded the research on funded the clinical trials on, done the FDA evaluation of, then we put it into the market place and we end up still paying the highest prices . Studies have shown that brand drug prices are 35 to 55 percent higher in the U.S., and top-selling medications a full 2.3 times more expensive compared to other industrialized countries. Over the past decade, prescription drugs accounted for 15 percent of the total increase in health spending, even though they account for only about 10 percent of what other countries spend.

Let's start getting drug costs under control by allowing Medicare to negotiate for lower drug prices and to lower those costs for everyone. We also have to crack down on the overpayments in Medicare to private plans. These Private plan payment rates are around 12 percent higher than Medicare traditionally pays to treat the same beneficiaries. Reducing these overpayments could save Medicare $10 to $20 billion dollars a year. Seniors don't want to lose the benefits they have under these plans, but under my reforms they would not.

We should also allow the importation of drugs from certain countries to lower costs and let's remove barriers to generic competition. While 53 percent of all prescriptions are generic medicines, they account for only 12 percent of total pharmaceutical costs. A one percent increase in the use of generics could yield $4 billion dollars in government savings.

We need to break the monopoly that biotech pharmaceutical companies have over their products, which can cost us so much money. Most Americans have no idea that right now, under current law and FDA practice, generic biopharmaceuticals are precluded from going to the market. And businesses and consumers are paying for that. You know the cost differential between generic and non-generic drugs is astounding: in 2003, the average cost for a one-day supply of non-generic drugs was $45.00, but only $1.66 for generic drugs.

There is bipartisan support for providing the long overdue authority for the FDA to approve generic products that are the biologics. Already, an unprecedented coalition of patients' groups, labor, business, pharmacists, governors and a number of forward looking biotech companies have united to support legislation that I introduced with Senator Charles Schumer and Congressman Henry Waxman. Providing such competition is projected to save $5 to $7 billion dollars a year in savings to businesses and consumers.

The final point that I would make today about lowering costs is to reduce costs through medical malpractice reform. While some have overstated the role that malpractice insurance plays in the health care crisis, I think we can all agree that we need reform that works for doctors and patients alike.

I have offered one solution that has been used successfully at the University of Michigan Hospital system. It's called the National Medical Error Disclosure and Compensation (MEDiC) Act as I have borrowed it from the University of Michigan to put it into law. It's a novel approach to improving patient safety and the quality of health care while protecting patients' rights, reducing medical errors and lowering malpractice costs. This Act would encourage physicians, hospitals and health systems to provide liability protections for physicians who disclose medical errors to patients and offer to enter into negotiations for fair compensation. At the University of Michigan, these policies have already resulted in greater patient trust and satisfaction, more patients being compensated for injuries, fewer malpractice suits, significantly reduced administrative costs and between one and three million dollars in litigation cost savings.

The rise in malpractice rates has spurred states like Texas and Nevada to allow doctors to create their own risk retention companies as an alternative to traditional liability insurance. Because a large percentage of actual malpractice is committed by a very small percentage of doctors who won't be included in insurance groups that other doctors control, thereby lowering malpractice rates for all.

Now as I have made clear in these seven points, we know that if we continue on our present path, health care costs in the U.S. will double within a decade, we know that we will spend increasing amounts and we aren't sure, and I think it is fair to say we know, that we won't improve quality and outcome.

Now how will this actually work? Well it has to be implemented over time according again to Rand who has been studying healthcare costs intensely now for several years. We could save $147 billion dollars from the information technology changes I have recommended, $20 to $30 billion dollars in administrative savings every year, $25 billion in savings from overpayments for pharmaceuticals and health plans, and there are billions more in countless other inefficiencies that could be rung out of our often wasteful health care system. We also will have to move toward a system where it is doctor-patient centered and consumer driven if we expect to really get the results that we need. Now there is no question that at least $120 billion dollars in projected savings that I have included in my plan are not only reasonable, but extremely conservative.

Now I know that a lot of this is kind of overly wonky, which is why I am glad there is an audience of people here today who really understand a lot of these issues, but I imagine, you know, many people wonder what all this adds up to. Well the Business Roundtable has recently estimated that just with a system that used information technology, the typical family would save $2,200 dollars, and I think that is a pretty impressive outcome for us doing what we need to be doing anyway.

The money we save from the waste we eliminate and the way we change how we care for people should be used to help finance coverage for the 45 million Americans who have no insurance. Also, when you insure everyone, it will maximize the impact of the prevention programs I have recommended -- with earlier care as opposed to emergency care -- as well as cutting administrative costs.

Our present system is outdated, ineffective, and unsustainable. We know how to do this. Many of you in this audience could give me ten more suggestions that we need to do immediately. Well the key is to develop the political will to make it happen through a coalition of those who are most directly affected. The people who deliver care, our doctors, our nurses our pharmacists and others, the people who pay for care, our business and our government and the people who receive care which is all the rest of us, because I know very well that every one of these recommendations will run into considerable opposition from forces that do not want change in our system.

So I believe that equally importantly to having a plan, we have to have a political consensus and that is what I am trying to develop as I talk about healthcare and engage in a conversation with the American people because I think Americans are ready for change. They are ready for a healthcare system that produces better results at lower cost and ends the shame of us not covering 45 million plus of our fellow Americans.

I look forward to your ideas about how we can pursue these goals and I hope you will join with me in being part of this broad based, national coalition that will not only talk about and demand change, but work to make sure, starting in 2009, that our political system actually delivers the changes we all know our healthcare system desperately needs.

Thank you all very much.

Well, Colleen, I can assure you that as President, I will strongly support schools like the Manchester School for Technology. I have for many years because I know how important schools like this are. At this very moment, students in this school may be learning how to wire an office building, or work the machinery that runs our automobiles, or fix the bugs that crash our computers. Every day, students at this school are discovering talents and strengths they never knew they had.
And that is because this school has great leadership. I want to especially thank the Principal. Karen White has led this school in an exemplary fashion, and I know she's worked closely with Governor Lynch to design the plans that will enable the school to be renovated and grow even stronger in the future. I really applaud your leadership, Karen. Because you can't look at the Manchester School of Technology without realizing that it didn't happen by accident. It was built by the people of this state who, even 25 years ago, understood that to compete in today's economy, young people need the skills for today's jobs. That's what we've always done here in America: When our economy changes, we don't panic or give up or wring our hands -- we simply change with it. That's what has happened here at MST. I really applaud you for doing that, because we have to look for examples like this to figure out what we need to do more broadly across our nation.

Now we've done this before. We did the same thing back at the turn of the 20th century. Back then, the American economy was dominated by large corporate monopolies. Corruption was far too common and good government far too rare. Women couldn't vote, and the minimum wage, well, that wasn't heard of and worker rights were completely unimagined. Back then, America was a country filled with haves and have nots -- and not enough people in between.

In response to these excesses, the progressive movement was born. Throughout the late 1800s and early 1900s, the progressives busted trusts and fought for safe working conditions and fair wages. They created the national park system, and replaced a government rife with cronyism with a merit-based civil service. They understood, as the great progressive President Teddy Roosevelt once said, that вЂњThe welfare of each of us is dependent fundamentally upon the welfare of all of us.вЂќ

Well, today, at the beginning of the 21st century, I think it's time we remembered those lessons. For the first time in history, we have a truly global economy. Workers today think nothing of holding teleconferences with colleagues on three continents at once or e-mailing business partners across the globe. Companies also think nothing of shipping our jobs -- even entire factories -- overseas. Today, competition no longer stops at the water's edge. In fact, for many of our companies, that's where it starts. For example, New Hampshire provides $2 billion worth of exports to 140 countries a year.

At the same time, technology is playing an increasingly important role. It's really revolutionizing how we live and work. We're seeing U.S. telemarketing jobs done in remote locations far, far from our shores. Manufacturing requires fewer jobs as machines replace people both here in America and around the world. In part because India and China have begun to harness the power of technology, they are on their way to becoming economic super powers.

Like it or not, that is the reality of globalization. And it isn't going away. However, if managed properly, globalization may offer the promise of new markets, new growth, and new opportunities for broadly shared prosperity to young people like Colleen.

Unfortunately, we're not managing globalization properly. Instead of working for all of us, globalization is working only for a few of us.

Now, it is working for corporations. Corporate profits have grown an average of 13% a year since 2001, adjusted for inflation. It's working for CEOs who've seen their pay go from 24 times the typical worker's in 1965, to 262 times the typical worker in 2005. And it's working for Americans with incomes at the very top. In 2005, all income gains went to the top 10% of households, while the bottom 90% saw their incomes decline, in spite of the fact that worker productivity has increased for six years.

Now, in past economic expansions, that's not the way it was. In the past, about 75% of net corporate revenues have gone to employee compensation, and only 25% to profits. However, for the past five years, the comparable figures are 41% going to employee compensation and 59% going to profits. Think about this: last year, the share of America's national income going to corporate profits was the highest since 1929 -- while the share going to the salaries of American workers was the lowest.

The inescapable reality is that globalization, modern technology, economic policy, are creating new conditions that threaten our middle class families and make it harder to maintain a middle class lifestyle.

Now, during the second half of the 1990s, productivity growth led to rising incomes across the board.

But over the past six years, while productivity has gone up 18 percent -- that means Americans are working harder than ever and, by most indicators, working harder than anybody else in the rest of the world -- family incomes have gone down $1,300.

The global labor market may even be depressing wages for skilled and professional jobs. Since 2001, new jobs created in America pay, on average, 21 percent less than the jobs we have lost.

And back in 2000, child poverty was the lowest it had been in 20 years. Since then it has risen by 1.3 million. And today we have 12 million children living in poverty.

Now, given these realities, it's unsurprising we're seeing rising inequality and rising pessimism in our workforce.

Today more than 80 percent of Americans believe that our manufacturing jobs are at risk of being outsourced.

And let's be clear. It's not as if America hasn't been successful economically the past 6 years. But the measure of success doesn't relate what's happening in households across our country, because, while productivity and corporate profits are up, the fruits of that success just hasn't reached many of our families. It's like trickle-down economics, but without the trickle.

As a result, the gap between those who are enjoying the fruits of the modern economy and those who aren't is growing wider.

In 1970, the top 1 percent of households held roughly 9 percent of our nation's income. In 2005, they held 22 percent, the highest level since 1929, a year that isn't exactly one of our best years in American history.

Now, our founders knew that inequality wasn't good for our country. They believed that vast concentrations of wealth were a threat to democracy. They believed America should give everyone, not just the children of the landed gentry, the chance to fulfill their God-given potential.

But today, that ideal is at risk. We are in danger of losing that uniquely American engine of opportunity that has created so much wealth and spread it so widely.

Believe it or not, today in some parts of Europe there is more social mobility than right here in America.

Well, now we haven't heard much from Washington in the past six years about how to solve this growing problem of inequality. In fact, the tax, investment, trade and budget policies of the administration and its allies in Congress have made the problem worse.

I believe people are fed up with the policies of the past six years. So many people I talk to just want to hit the restart button on the 21st century and redo it the right way. And I agree with them.

Now, after all, we started the decade with rising incomes, declining inequality, robust job growth and a surplus in our federal budget. Instead of building on policies that worked, the Washington Republicans reversed them with predictable but intolerable consequences.

I believe that one of the most crucial jobs of the next president is to define a new vision of economic fairness and prosperity for the 21st century, a vision for how we ensure greater opportunity for our next generation, and then to outline a strategy and then to implement it.

Today, I believe we need a new progressive vision for this new century. Now, I consider myself a thoroughly optimistic and modern progressive. I believe we can grow our economy in the face of global competition, and in a way that benefits all Americans.

I believe we can curb the excesses of the marketplace and provide more opportunities for more Americans to succeed.

I believe we can support and promote smart trade policies that truly enforce strong labor and environmental standards.

I believe we can help more workers join unions to improve wages and conditions in our workplaces for jobs that cannot be shipped overseas.

I believe that, just as 20th-century progressives fought corruption with a new civil service, we can restore competence to the front lines of our government and ensure that we never, ever experience another Hurricane Katrina.

In short, I believe that our government can once again work for all Americans. It can promote the great American tradition of opportunity for all and special privileges for none.

Today I want to focus on how we ensure both strong economic growth and economic fairness.

Now, we have seen for more than a century that fairness doesn't just happen. It requires the right government policies. And no one should be surprised, human nature being what it is, people will go as far as they possibly can get away with.

The genius of the American economic in the 20th century was that it helped to counter that tendency for people to push as far as their own interests would take them so that we created a leveler playing field that benefited everyone.

Unfortunately, for the past six years it's as though we've gone back to the era of the robber barons. Year after year the president has handed out massive tax breaks to oil companies, no-bid contracts to Halliburton, tax incentives to corporations shipping jobs overseas, tax cut after tax cut to multimillionaires, while ignoring the needs and aspirations of tens of millions of working families.

And how has he paid for all of this largess? By running up record deficits. He has simply charged it to our national credit card and left our children and grandchildren to pay the bill.

In fact, every baby born today starts like with $29,000 of national debt on his or her tiny shoulders, the largest birth tax in our nation's history.

It's also important to understand these policies are consistent with the administration's theory about how we should manage our economy: leave it all up to the individual.

That's why they want to privatize Social Security and let individuals bear the risks. It's why their answer to the health care crisis is limited to creating health savings account, which allows the healthiest people to get the best deal, with little concern if the sickest get worse.

They call it the ownership society. But it's really the "on your own" society.

On the other hand, they protect the drug companies from competition, including from their own products coming back across the border from Canada. And they give health care companies a subsidy of more than $1,000 per person to compete with Medicare. That is hardly the free market at work.

As a result, too many of our families are left running in place or falling behind.

Health care premiums have gone up 87 percent since 2000; college costs up 40 percent since the 2000 school year. Gas prices have more than doubled. And I don't need to tell anyone that they're heading even higher today.

Wages and incomes are lagging so much that, after five years of overall growth, there's been a 4 percent increase in the percentage of workers falling below the poverty line, and a 4 percent increase in working families losing their health insurance.

It's like our middle-class and hardworking families are invisible to this president.

If you're a worker who can't organize for fair wages and safe working conditions, you're invisible.

If you're one of the over 45 million Americans who don't have health insurance, you're invisible, too.

If your company has shipped your job overseas and you don't know how to pay your bills, well, you're invisible.

If you drive up to the gas station and have to pay well over $3.20 or $3.30 a gallon to fill up your tank, you're invisible as well.

Well, you're not invisible to me. And we can't restore the American dream unless you're a very visible part of it.

It's time for a new beginning, for an end to government of the few, by the few and for the few, time to reject the idea of an "on your own" society and to replace it with shared responsibility for shared prosperity. I prefer a "we're all in it together" society.

Now, there is no greater force for economic growth than free markets, but markets work best with rules that promote our values, protect our workers and give all people a chance to succeed.

When we get our priorities in order and make the smart investments we need, the markets work well.

Some of you might remember that, while we began the 1990s with record deficits, we ended the decade with a balanced budget, a record surplus, higher wages for the middle class, and 22 million new jobs.

Now, of course, we can't simply recycle the policies that worked in the 1990s. These are different times.

But we can return to many of the principles that guided us then, the principles that have worked time and time again to build our economy, expand opportunity, and offer all Americans the chance to have that American dream which we promised.

Now, I'm the product of this chance. I grew up in a middle-class family in the middle of America in the middle of the last century.

My father came back from World War II after having served in the Navy, and he worked hard to build his small business. He believed that one should avoid being in debt at all costs, and instilled in me the importance of being responsible with a budget at an early age, a value I still hold dear today.

Like millions of other families, we worked hard, we saved and we invested. And together, our determination and work ethic helped to create the American middle class.

Now that middle class is under assault from global economic forces and wrongheaded economic policies. So I'm proposing a new progressive plan to restore that American dream and to give all Americans the chance to compete and prosper in the global economy.

Here's what I believe we should do.

First, I'm going to work to level the playing field and reduce the special breaks for big corporations. We say this in every campaign. We make a little bit of progress. And then unfortunately, when the Republicans get back in office, they reverse everything we've done and add to the corporate welfare.

Well, I think we're going to have a better shot this time because we're going to make it an issue in this campaign. We're going to ask people who are running for Congress to sign up one way or the other: Are they for corporate welfare, or are they for the average American having a decent shot at the American dream?

And there's a lot we could do right now.

You know, I believe that if we did give Medicare the chance to negotiate with drug companies, we would save $10 billion to $15 billion a year. Why should the drug companies be immune from the process that goes on every day in America, where you bargain for the best deal you can get? And we need to give our government that opportunity to do so.

When Bill was president, he gave it to the V.A., which is one of the reasons why the V.A. has the lowest drug prices in America today. Bargaining really does make a difference.

We also need to require the big oil companies that are making the largest profits in the history of the world to invest in alternative energy themselves or pay into a fund to spur clean energy research and development. And there are many other examples that we could all give about how to zero in on corporate welfare.

Second, let's once and for all get rid of the incentives for American companies to ship jobs and profits overseas. It is one thing for the marketplace to encourage overseas investment. It's another for our own tax code to do so.

But that's exactly what is happening. Today, American companies that ship jobs overseas don't have to pay a penny in American taxes on the profits they make abroad unless they bring those profits back to the United States. And, of course, they don't bring them back because they don't want to pay taxes on them.

It's estimated this policy costs us billions of dollars each year in lost tax revenues. Even worse, we actually put companies that want to create jobs here on our shores at a disadvantage to those who ship jobs to tax havens.

Now, when I'm president we're going to reward decisions to create jobs here at home. We will consider eliminating the deduction for the actual costs of moving jobs.

These are decisions that, if there's going to be a level playing field, there should be no advantage given to anyone who takes a job and sends it overseas at the disadvantage of our workforce.

Third, let's reform the governance of our corporations and our financial sector. If you have any doubt about whether corporate governance impacts ordinary Americans, just think back to what happened at Enron, where thousands of workers lost much of their retirement savings.

The way I see it, allowing CEOs to escape with golden parachutes while their companies abandon workers' pensions does not honor our values.

We need to open up CEO compensation to public scrutiny and public challenge and ensure that boards of directors are independent when determining CEO pay. And we need to update our regulations to confront the emerging problems in our sub-prime and private equity markets.

Fourth, let's restore fiscal responsibility to our government. Let's get back to balanced budgets and save Social Security instead of running up our deficits.

You know, people ask me all the time, "Why can't we get tough on China?" Well, the answer is, because China is one of our bankers. We're their debtor. How can we truly enforce trade laws against a country that manipulates it currency and puts us at an unfair advantage when our economic stability depends on China's massive loans to us every single day?

And when the president's irresponsible tax breaks for high-income Americans expire, we will return to the income tax rates for upper- income Americans that we had in the 1990s, rates that were consistent with a balanced budget and economic growth.

For middle-class Americans, who haven't seen their paychecks increase, let's keep the middle-class tax cuts and reform the alternative minimum tax in order to give middle-class Americans the tax relief they deserve to have.

And let's take a hard look at corporate tax reform. It's simply not fair that as corporate profits have skyrocketed, the percentage of taxes paid by corporations have fallen.

It's time we restored the balance and required corporations to pay their fair share. Under the law, after all, they are citizens of the United States, with many of the responsibilities, I would argue, that goes with citizenship.

Fifth, let's recommit ourselves to the idea that every young person in America who wants to should have the opportunity to attend college, and that a 21st-century education starts early in life and continues well into adulthood.

We know that having the most skilled, educated workforce in the world is key to our future success. That starts at the very beginning, with access to universal pre-kindergarten: high-quality learning opportunities for every 4-year-old in America. And I've laid out a proposal that would do exactly that.

We know that pre-kindergarten keeps kids in school longer, keeps them out of trouble, gives them more incentive to be academically interested and that it is a good payoff for our country: For every dollar invested, we get a $7 return.

The alternative is to pay costs in other ways. A startling fact is that some states in our country, when they're planning how many prison beds they need, look at third-grade test scores. And they extrapolate from the number of children who are failing in third-grade reading as to how many prison beds they'll need.

That's a lot more expensive than providing pre- kindergarten to those same children to hopefully keep them out of our prisons.

We also have to do more to raise up the opportunity for young people from middle-class and working families and poor families to be able to go to college.

Seventy-five percent of students at America's elite colleges come from the top 25 percent of the income bracket, just 3 percent from the bottom 25 percent.

We've got to make college affordable again, and that means everything from increasing Pell grants to changing the way college loans are provided and cleaning up the college loan industry from all of the scandals that is besetting it. Because if we don't make college affordable, we are seeing the results: Young people can't go.

The last time I was in Manchester I was talking with some of the teachers from one of the high schools here who told me that many young people were just really confused because they didn't have the money to go to college, and they didn't know what they were going to do. So we've got to do a better job than that.

Sixth, for those who don't attend four-year colleges and those in the workforce who need to update their skills, let's provide more support for schools like this and for community colleges that prepare people for good, high-paying jobs.

And let's provide wage insurance for our workers so that if you lose your job because of our trade policies, you can get the training and support you need for a new and better job.

There are a lot of jobs in our country that are going begging because we don't have the people with the skills to be able to fill those jobs.

Two examples.

We will need 35,000 automotive mechanics every year from now until 2010.

Automotive Retailing Today reports that we have 37,000 vacancies for mechanics right now. These jobs pay salaries up to $70,000 a year. And employers are aggressively recruiting talented high school graduates to fill these positions.

I met recently with the Machinist union. They were telling me the same thing about Airline Mechanics. They have hundreds of good jobs they can't fill. It's not just that we can't fill these jobs; it's that we've come to a point in our society where, frankly, we don't have the respect that that these jobs should demand.

This is something I feel very strongly about. We have sent a message to our young people that if you don't go to college and you don't have a high paying job---something like a basketball player or an entertainer, or maybe someone in a corporation---that you're thought less of in America. We have to stop this. Our country cannot run without the people who do the skills that are taught in this school.

And it is time we begin to reverse the attitude that I think for too long has prevailed, which is why I'm so pleased that Governor Lynch will be adding to the money available through the state for technology and other kinds of advanced degree learning that can give young people a belief that doing these jobs is important.

As Senator, I championed Regional Skills Alliances that support employers in the same geographic region and industry. They support employers who pool their resources and broaden opportunities so that employees can get the training they need in today's economy. I think we need more programs like this. And when I'm President, we're going to create more programs like this so that our workers will have the skills they need for the jobs they deserve.

Those 1,200 people who come at night: That's what they're doing. They're trying to get additional skills that will enable them to fill jobs that already exist in this region.

And we're going to create more jobs and more regional skills alliances when I'm president.

Seventh, let's ensure that people who work hard every day can support their families and save for the future. I do not believe anyone who works full-time in America should draw a wage that puts that person below the poverty line. If you are a full time worker you should make more than poverty.

Now that we've finally reach the minimum wage, let's expand and simplify the Earned Income Tax Credit so no one working full time lives in poverty.

Let's also finally overhaul our unemployment insurance program. Today's unemployment benefits aren't even enough to keep an average family above the poverty line. And many workers in today's economy -- including part time and self-employed workers -- are still ineligible for unemployment insurance.

Our unemployment system has hardly changed at all over the last 70 years, and yet we know a lot of employers don't want to give people full time jobs. They only give them part time jobs so they don't have to pay for benefits. So when someone is laid off or loses that part time job, under our existing system even though it was all they could get, they're not eligible for unemployment insurance help. So I'm hoping that we can do a better job by looking at our unemployment system and bringing it into the modern age.

I think we also have to have a modern attitude toward unions. We know that unionized workers make 30% more than workers who aren't in unions. But today, just 7% of our workplace in the private sector is unionized.

We need to give workers more of the benefits that come with union membership. Let's pass the Employee Free Choice Act to make sure our unions can organize for fair wages and safe working conditions. Let's appoint people to the Department of Labor who are truly pro-labor. That would be an unusual idea, don't you think?

Unions played a critical role in building the middle class, and I don't think it's a coincidence that as union membership has dropped, middle class incomes have stagnated. So this is not an either-or choice; we can have both. Some people say, well, if you have more unionization that would make America uncompetitive, but there are other countries in the global economy that pay wages equal to or higher than ours, and many jobs that are important to the economy in those countries demand a really good living wage for a middle class family. Their lower-paid workers are paid more than our lower-paid workers, but their higher paid workers are paid less. So there's less of a gap between our lower paid workers and our highest paid workers which means that there's more money for those wage increases in the middle.

That's what worked for America until relatively recently, and that's what we have to persuade people is good for America again.

Eighth, let's ensure everyone the most fundamental benefit there is -- quality, affordable health care. Now, we know that this is going to be challenging but if we could spend more than $500 billion to fund the war in Iraq, we can surely make the basic investments to ensure that every American can see a doctor when he or she needs to.

Ninth and finally, let's make the investments we need to create the millions of good jobs necessary to lift up all of our families. To preserve and expand the middle class in an open, global economy, we have to have a source of good new jobs every five to eight years. Telecom did that during the вЂ90s. In this decade, that means an all out commitment to a clean, independent energy future.

I'll be talking a lot more about investing in alternative energy and energy efficiency. Because we know that alternative energy isn't just good for our national security, and we know that it's imperative for our environment and to tackle global warming -- but it is also good for our economy. By working to break our addiction to foreign oil and investing in clean energy technology, we can create good new jobs right here in America.

When I was up in Berlin, they were hoping that we could take those old paper and pulp mills and turn them into energy creators by using wood. So instead of using wood for the purposes that it's been harvested in New Hampshire for hundreds of years, you would use it for creating energy. Well, these are the kinds of new jobs that we need to be looking for across our country.

I also believe we have to invest in 21st century infrastructure we need to compete. I also believe we have to invest in 21st-century infrastructure to compete. Let's set a goal of putting high-speed Internet access through broadband or wireless within the reach of every single American so that people throughout this state and every other one will be able to participate in the global economy.

In New York, as a senator, I've done a lot of work trying to work with chambers of commerce and others to create zones for access to high-speed Internet, because it was difficult to attract jobs to the Adirondacks or to other areas of rural New York without having that. We haven't had much help from the federal government, but I've been introducing legislation every since I arrived in the Senate to do just that. Just as we had a railroad system that connected our country, an electrification system, an interstate highway system, an airport system, we have to have a broadband system

I also am not giving up on manufacturing. I believe we can still have a vibrant manufacturing base, with the right policies. It provides an immediate laboratory for innovation and a challenging feedback loop for engineers, designers and dreamers. It's an invaluable training ground for a new generation of entrepreneurs and leaders. That's why I helped to start the Senate Manufacturing Caucus, where I've worked to develop a manufacturing strategy that will be suitable with the challenges of the 21st century.

I also founded a group called New Jobs for New York, a unique non-profit that harnesses the ingenuity, entrepreneurship and hard work of New Yorkers. And I want to do that across our country. You know, we've been able to show companies in New York they didn't need to leave our country in order to get qualified people to do the work. We also commissioned a study which proved the cost of moving jobs to other countries is a lot greater than people actually understand or realize.

So there's a lot we can do to give us a source of new jobs and to have an innovation agenda that will make us competitive going forward. We can't do it if we just accept the Republican policies or if we just believe America's best days are over.

You know, a lot of people around the world are writing America off. They do believe our best days are behind us. I could not disagree more. I believe America can rebound from these last six years. I believe we can restore fairness and ensure that all share in our prosperity. I believe we can reduce the deficit and restore fiscal responsibility and give people the education and opportunities they need to fulfill their God-given potentials.

I'm running for president because I believe if we set big goals and we work together to achieve them, we can restore the American dream today and for the next generation. The core ideals of a 21st-century progressivism are simple. The foundation of a strong economy is the investments we make in each other: in education, health care, clean energy and new technologies. Greatness comes from policies that promote prosperity and ensure we all share in it.

Now, living up to these ideals and changing the political makeup will not be easy. But I'm absolutely confident we can do it. And I would just close by thinking of that great Granite Stater Daniel Webster. He said it years ago when he urged us to "develop the resources of our land, call forth its powers, build up its institutions, promote all its great interests and see whether we also, in our day and generation, may not perform something worthy to be remembered."

I'm confident we have the discipline, the determination and the drive that we will not be the first generation in American history to leave our country worse off than when we found it. But we will continue, as every generation has before, to create much that is worthy to be remembered. We will restore fairness and responsibility to our economy, rebuild our middle class and rise to the challenges of this new global century.

It is a real pleasure for me to be here, speaking to the Silicon Valley Leadership Group, which I understand has been around for nearly 30 years. It is hard to believe that 30 years have passed but it is clear that those 30 years revolutionized our country and our world. And I am grateful for the contribution that all of you have made to that revolution.
You know it as well as anyone, the benefits that spring from globalization. It has lifted more people out of poverty around the world than probably any other advance in recent history. It has certainly helped expand our prosperity here at home in many important ways. Again, it is inevitable. So, there is no escaping this and what we have to do in America today is figure out how to best harness the force of globalization to ensure a continuing quality of life and standard of living.

But I have to tell you, here in the Silicon Valley, based on the work that I have done for many years, and in particular as a Senator from New York for the past six and a half years, and now as a candidate for President, there is a deep sense of anxiety in America. It is an anxiety that is rooted in the reality that for many Americans, they have seen their wages stagnate. They have seen the price of everything else that they need in life, health care to college tuition to the price of gas at the pump, continue to go up. And they believe that somehow they are not getting ahead, despite the fact that many of us here, and millions of others of us around our country are.

I think that the fear that our prosperity will not be shared has very serious consequences for not only our economy but for our society and for our politics. And certainly the policies of the last six years have done little to assuage the fear that people feel. Over the past six years, while productivity has gone up 18 percent, average family income has gone down 1,300 dollars. The result is a pessimistic view that America can't win in the global economy unless the middle class loses.

Well, I believe we ought to hit the restart button on the 21st century because America not only can but must succeed in the 21st century. And it's time for a thoroughly modern and optimistic, progressive vision for how we do that.

Now, I've given a series of speeches outlining what I believe that vision should be. I've talked about reforming our government so it works for the vast majority of Americans. I've outlined a series of steps to ensure that prosperity is shared and that equal opportunity is real. And today, I want to discuss policy that I believe would help us promote innovation and steps to spread the benefits of that innovation throughout America.

That means dedicating more resources to areas like alternative energy and basic research and involving more people in the innovation economy. There is no doubt in my mind that American ingenuity is the key to greater prosperity in the face of global competition. That's what set us apart in the 20th century, and combined with the right policies to create opportunities for all, it will set us apart in this century.

Unfortunately, while other nations have marched ahead, we've been marching sideways. Over the past twelve years, while American investment in research and development has remained relatively static, China has doubled the share of its national wealth invested in R&D. The European Union has set a goal of increasing R&D investments by member states to 2.5 percent of GDP by 2010, nearly matching us. The education pipeline, the source of future innovators, reveals the same trend. Between 1970 and 2000, as many as of you know too well, America's global share of PhDs in science and engineering declined from 40 percent to 20 percent. That rate is expected to drop to 15 percent in the next 3 years. Too few of our college students are studying the STEM subjects: science, technology, engineering, and math.

Our innovation infrastructure is falling behind, too. We've dropped considerably in our broadband deployment. Depending on which survey you look at, it's going to be 12th to 25th. The bottom line is it is not good news for what we're trying to achieve.

Now in this debate about how to move forward, too often policy makers will wall themselves off into two competing camps. There are those who say there is nothing to worry about and others who say there is nothing we can do. I have familiarity with both camps, and I believe both are wrong. For those who say there is nothing to worry about, I think that their rosy scenarios are doomed to failure and they will be unfortunately proven wrong. But at what cost? And for those who say that's just the way the rest of the world works and we can't really do anything about this, I think that's a streak of fatalism that I find profoundly un-American.

America remains the preeminent destination for discovery, but our global leadership and vision did not happen by accident. It took smart, forward thinking policies that used what was right about America to make America stronger. Yes, global competition is a challenge, but it is also an opportunity to lead the world in new fields like nanotechnology, while lifting up our standard of living and opening up new markets to American products.

Energy dependence is the greatest innovation challenge that America has faced in generations. It is also an unparalleled opportunity to start new green industries and reduce our dependence on foreign oil. Climate change is a major threat, but if we act to address it rather than ignore it, we could move toward new renewable energy and create millions of new jobs here in America.

I mean just think about it, America was built on innovation. One of my favorite examples is President Lincoln, in the middle of the Civil War, a war that no one could predict that he would win and keep the Union together, decided to give the go ahead for two major national endeavors, one to complete the international, in the sense of cross-national, railroad, you know, to be able to go to from one coast to the other. The second was starting a system of land-grant colleges. Imagine the optimism it took to be sitting in the White House getting so many reports of dire outcomes in battles across the East Coast and to think when this is over we are going to need places to educate the next generation.

Obviously, we had the same spirit of can-do progressivism at the turn of the last century; during the Great Depression; there is a highway system under President Eisenhower, putting highways where people didn't even live yet with the confidence that they soon would. The space program is a perfect example. And we certainly can point in the private sector to two guys in a garage named Hewlett and Packard or a team of researchers working for the Defense Department on a technology called "Stealth," and see how the partnership that was forged, starting in the 1950s and into the 1960s, had such far reaching consequences for both the public and the private sector.

A culture that values and invests in ideas is part and parcel of the promise of America. And we have always supported that culture with public investments that accompanied our entrepreneurial spirit, the availability of capital, and the best university system in the world.

Now, what is happening today is we are not realizing either the benefits of those earlier investments or keeping our eye on the horizon as to how we, in this generation, in this century, will make our own contribution as a part of America's innovative agenda. Think about how the first lanes of the information superhighways were laid by our researchers. They built a new way of sharing information because of an insatiable appetite for data in the pursuit of discovery. Hugely consequential advances in logistics were pioneered by American companies. And we know that America may well be the land of opportunity, but it's also the land where people keep their eyes on opportunity costs.

The fire that was sparked here in this valley has made such a difference but it can't just be allowed to sputter out. There has to be a partnership again between our government and our great companies and the entrepreneurs who yet have not discovered what it is that will revolutionize the way we live today. So, what are we to do and how do we do it?

Well, today I'm proposing a nine-point agenda to renew the promise of America, create good jobs, and bolster our capacity to innovate. Investing in alternative energy and basic research. Strengthening our science, engineering, and mathematics workforce. Reinforcing our innovation infrastructure through broadband with better incentives for research and development. Restoring scientific integrity in Washington.

First, I propose a national commitment to solving the energy and global warming challenges. A $50 billion Strategic Energy Fund, paid for in part by closing the tax subsidies and loopholes that the oil companies still enjoy. It's almost impossible to imagine we are still subsidizing companies that have made the largest profits in the history of the world. Now, I do think there is a role for subsidies, and I'll get to that in a minute, but for mature companies in mature markets, that has to be carefully considered.

This fund would invest in technologies available right now, to promote conservation and combat global warming, end our dependence on foreign oil. The fund creates an energy initiative modeled on DARPA -- the Defense Advanced Research Project Agency. We bring together, as we once did in DARPA, the best minds in the public and private sectors to think outside the proverbial box. To do high risk, high reward research we can't even predict what the benefits will be.

I know that the Silicon Valley Leadership Group has just put forth a 12 point campaign with an agenda called "Clean and Green," and I just received a copy of that and I look forward to looking at it. But winning the 21st century energy race is as important and as potentially productive and profitable as winning the 20th century space race. We can safeguard our environment, grow the economy, protect our security, and create millions of good new jobs.

I think that if you look at the experiences of other countries, you can certainly see the economic impact of this. United Kingdom signed Kyoto when we didn't. And not only did they meet their earliest Kyoto target to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, but they created thousands of jobs, they kept unemployment low, and wages increased.

Instead of leading the world in oil imports, America can lead in green technology exports. I know that this organization is holding a series of events on this, and that Applied Materials is doing innovative work with solar technology. I believe, however, that in the absence of a national effort, modeled on the Apollo project for example, it will be very difficult to bring to scale and commercialization the changes that we need and that we can produce with the proper incentives. The country that split the atom can end our dependence on foreign oil and launch an energy revolution. We can call it Energy 2.0.

Second, as President, I will increase support for basic and applied research by increasing the research budgets at the National Science Foundation, the Department of Energy's Office of Science, and the Department of Defense. We'll boost funding by 50 percent over 10 years, with a greater emphasis on high-risk, high-return investment.

Unfortunately, under the Bush administration, spending on basic and applied research has declined in real terms four years in a row. DARPA -- where basic research led to the precursors of the internet, the computer mouse, and so much more -- is putting less of its resources into truly revolutionary research. In fact, DARPA is becoming much more problem-solving oriented, and there is a reason for that. When you look at how difficult it is to combat the improvised explosive devices in Iraq, it's understandable that people would be put on overtime to try to figure out how to jam the signal -- how to do anything to prevent them from exploding or being placed in the first place.

Why is it an either-or? And why don't we continue to fund what we need to for our military and their protection for both defensive and offensive purposes, and put the money in that we need to continue the kind of cutting edge research that has produced such great results?

Often investments in basic research take decades to pay off, as so many of you know, or they don't pay off at all. That's why the private sector devotes only 5 percent of all its resources to basic research. But when this type of work leads to big breakthroughs, applied research, and eventually to new tools and products, the entire economy benefits. And I think government can work in partnership with the private sector by taking the lead in funding these kinds of "blue sky" endeavors.

Third, I propose we increase the National Institute of Health budget by 50 percent over five years with the goal of doubling it over the next decade. What is happening with NIH is particularly troubling. We know that NIH funded researchers have produced breakthroughs and treatments for heart disease, cancer, AIDS and so much else.

The NIH budget was doubled between 1998 and 2003 and universities and researchers had high hopes for continued funding and we truly are on the brink of so many important breakthroughs. In the years since, the rug has been pulled out from underneath a lot of our best minds. The President's budget for 2008 actually cut funding. The consequences of unpredictable and declining resources are halted construction on new laboratories, fewer grants for researchers, uncertainty in current projects, and less support for creative, outside-the-box ideas being investigated by younger researchers.

Nobel Prize winning biochemist Roger Kornberg recently said, "In the present climate especially, the funding decisions are ultraconservative. If the work that you propose to do isn't virtually certain of success, then it won't be funded. And of course, the kind of work that we would most like to see take place, which is groundbreaking and innovative, lies at the other extreme."

America has led the world in biotech research but we cannot rest on our laurels. Singapore is investing massively in biotech. European communities aren't standing still. Investments in NIH will not only help lead to cures, but will grow the economy.

Fourth, I am proposing renewed commitment to multidisciplinary research, such as a combination of biotechnology, information technology, nanotechnology, a greater emphasis on public-private partnerships, and new efforts to promote collaboration and off-the-grid ideas.

Here is an area where America has a unique, built-in competitive advantage. No other nation lays claim to the depth and breadth of excellence across different scientific and technological fields than we do. By bridging areas of expertise, we can bridge gaps in our understanding. And as well you know, sometimes the best answers involve approaching an old question in a new way.

For instance, we should increase investments in non-health applications of bio-technology. NIH funded effort dominate life science's research but few programs explore non-health applications, such as bacteria that could dramatically reduce the costs of cleaning up Superfund sites.

Another important step we must take is in health information technology. Bringing the efficiency of the information age to medical care -- through electronic medical records, for example -- can save money, save lives, and prevent mistakes.

I have been working on this for more than four years, I started with former Senator Frist in a bipartisan effort to create a framework for health information technology. We finally got it through the Senate, but it died in the House. We're going to try to bring it back and get this done once and for all. And I know some of the companies represented here have been very helpful in thinking through the architecture of a health IT system for our country.

We should invest in e-science to accelerate the pace of discovery. You know as well as anyone, information is only as useful as the means of putting it in useful hands. Billions and billions of data points are waiting in laptops and flash drives and paper files -- waiting to become the next great medical discovery or understanding of how to stem global warming. By investing in new tools to help scientists collaborate, process information, and share data, we can unleash a wave of discovery and benefits to our society.

Promoting these new collaborations between universities and industry is also essential. We have to fill the gap left by the decline in great private sector research institutions like Bell Labs, which produced technologies like the laser and many world-renowned scientists.

One other idea: let's use competitive prizes to encourage innovation. We've got all these reality shows about singing and modeling and hair styling, and you name it. Well, let's do some reality shows about innovation, and let's have some cash prizes out there to get young people to start thinking that way. I've long said that if we could have some really good programming about math students and engineers that would get people excited. We have so many kids who now want to go into forensics because they've seen it on TV.

If we propose prizes to be part of our budget at our research agencies, we could seek out new ideas from unexpected places. We ought to try to construct buildings that use onsite renewable energy technologies. I'm holding a contest to pick campaign theme song, and my campaign got ideas we never would've thought of from very unusual sources -- look at YouTube and you can see that for sure.

While investing in ideas and research, we should also invest in skills and education. This has become almost a clichГ©, hasn't it? And I have had countless meetings with people from the Silicon Valley and in Silicon Valley bemoaning the shortage in the skills that are needed.

But I hear that across the country. There are auto mechanic jobs we cannot fill today. Thousands of them, making 50, 60, 70 thousand dollars. There are airline mechanic jobs that we can't fill -- there are so many jobs that we can't get the right mix between the person and the skill and the job. We need a much better approach to doing this.

Now, with respect specifically to innovations, I propose tripling the number of NSF fellowships, and increasing the size of each award. We need to treat our young scientists and engineers with respect and provide real rewards. They should know that our country needs them, because in fact we do.

I've talked to many people who went into math, or physics, or chemistry after Sputnik and the space program which peaked their interest. They're all reaching retirement age. You think there's a skill shortage now, project it out a decade and we're going to be in real trouble if we don't figure out how to get the pipelines built.

Now, light bulb moments require electricity. And education is the ultimate innovation prerequisite. Unfortunately, here again we are ceding ground to other nations. 50% of the undergraduates in China are earning degrees in science and engineering; in America the rate is 15%.

The U.S. instituted National Science Foundation fellowships in response to the Soviet Union and the space race. In the decade since the number of grants is largely unchanged, despite a three-fold increase in the number of college students graduating with science and engineering degrees. So we face different challenges, but we need a similar commitment.

I co-sponsored the America Compete Act, which recently passed the Senate, to increase the advanced classes for high school students in math and science, and to put more people in the scientific and engineering pipeline. We have to act now to improve education and research in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics in order to retain our leadership. And we've got to start using new ideas.

My husband recently spoke at a school that he and I started in Arkansas -- the Arkansas Math and Science High School. And it was started because there are a lot of young people around the state who cared about math and science, but their high schools couldn't offer a very challenging curriculum. It's a boarding school and kids come from all over, and they come mostly from small towns. There were only, I recall, maybe 88 graduates, and they brought in $9 million worth of scholarships because in that environment, which was self-selected and which drove a really high standard, they responded.

So I think we should do even more to think about how we are going to find these skills. It may be that we need more of these public boarding schools. Let's think about how we really make math, science, engineering and technology attractive.

Two of my proposals were included in the bill that passed. First, I would create new fellowships at the NSF to allow math and science professionals to become teachers in high-need schools, and to train current math teachers with expertise to become mentors and professionals.

These are modeled on two successful programs in New York. I also included a study to be conducted by the National Academy of Sciences to investigate promising practices in math and science education.

We obviously need to do a better job of reproducing educational excellence and we need to have national standards in math and science education. There's not a difference in algebra across state lines and we act as though there is, and it's time to say enough. We need national standards, at least, in math and science.

Sixth, we have to open the doors of science and engineering to more people, especially women and minorities. We've done a great job bringing the best and brightest from around the world but we have to do more to get women and minorities to be involved, and as president I will try to promote that, to tap new sources of talent and to set examples by having a greater public awareness of what awaits. You know, one of my favorite people is the president of RPI in New York who previously was the head of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission. She's the first or the second African American woman to receive a PhD in nuclear physics. Well, I don't know if enough people know about her and know about what she has done with her life and how she can, perhaps, serve as an example for others.

So we need to do more and we have to also recognize the shortage that exists now. So I am reaffirming my commitment to the H1B visa and increasing the current cap. Let's just face the fact that foreign skilled workers contribute greatly to what we have to do in being innovators. And certainly that's understood well here in Silicon Valley where more than a quarter of highly skilled professionals are immigrants. But I would hope that we could do more of what I've suggested simultaneously. Yes, increase the cap; yes, try to get green cards for those who graduate from our colleges and universities after we've trained them so they don't go home, let's try and keep them here. There's a lot we can do to deal with the overreaction, in many ways, post-9/11, but let's also think about what else we're going to do here.

One thing that I would offer for your consideration is whether it is possible to create some kind of continuing education or curriculum that could be available because what I find as I travel around the country are engineers who come up to me and say, "I've been an engineer at this country for 12 years or 18 years, and now I'm being asked to train my successor because my job is being outsourced. What am I supposed to do?" Well, if that engineer's talent and skills truly are not marketable in the current from, then what can we do to try to make them marketable? How can we create that opportunity?

Seventh, as president I'll ensure we have a national commitment to broadband. Now we need to invest in our infrastructure and, what the railroads were to the 19th century and electricity was to the 20th, we know that innovation tools like broadband are essential to the economy of the 21st century. We should not be satisfied with our standings slipping year by year. We are the birthplace of the Internet, but our broadband infrastructure is stuck in adolescence. And I proposed an agenda to bring the information age economy to every corner of our country. It is possible to do this. We need national leadership. I've introduced broadband proposals, we're going to keep working on this, but it's critical if we're going to connect up the country.

Eighth, I've proposed overhauling the research and experimentation tax credit. Let's make it permanent, more effective, and larger if necessary. We will not get exciting new applications unless we encourage companies to invest in research -- and do it in America. The R&E tax credit is used by more than 15,000 companies who might not otherwise put many dollars into innovative ideas. We have failed to make the credit permanent; we always renew it year-by-year. It needs to be made permanent not only for the practicality but also as a symbol of what we believe about our future.

And finally, a culture that values innovation requires a government that values facts.

I am just often struck by how hard this Administration has tried to turn Washington into an evidence-free zone where the facts are subordinated to partisanship and where evidence was disregarded in favor of ideology. The integrity of science has been under assault for six years, and whether it was mercury in our water or carbon dioxide in our atmosphere or decisions over women's health, ideologues called the shots. Everyday, here in the Valley, you make decisions based on facts and evidence, not preconceived notions. I don't think it's too much to ask that our government does the same.

In April, I outlined a comprehensive government reform agenda, and this was an important piece. Now way back in the 1990s, Congress had an Office of Technology Assessment that was charged with just one task: telling us the truth about science, sorting out the competing claims, and to the best of the scientists' abilities, telling us what to believe. For decades they cut through the myths and the spin on everything from Star Wars to AIDS prevention to solar technology. It's time to put this office back in business, because how can we as a democracy make good decisions if we either don't have the facts or if they are actively withheld from us? And if we're going to reap the benefits of innovation, we have to take every step to ensure that our trading partners adhere to a standard of intellectual property protection similar to what we have in the United States.

I know that intellectual property piracy costs companies millions of dollars every year and that piracy and counterfeiting hit our high-tech companies more than any other sector in the economy. So let's get back to free and open scientific enquiry and the promise and provenance of a free and open society, and let's also take the steps necessary to protect the results of that free and open enquiry.

So do we face big challenges? Yes. Is our economy changing? Of course. But we've done this before and I'm confident we can do it again. Call me an honest optimist or a practical visionary, whatever, but I believe this is all doable because we are a nation of innovators, and you are both the beneficiaries and the benefactors of that innovative culture. And it is a culture of ingenuity, and in its absence we cannot expect to continue the standard of living and the quality of life that have marked our country, that have served as such an inspirational route to the American dream.

We need leadership to get this done; I believe America is ready for change. Obviously I'm offering myself to lead that change because I believe it is one of the most important issues confronting us, and I want to hear your ideas and to work with you. Call this version 1.0 of my innovation agenda, so after collaborating with some of you we'll perhaps tweak it and fine tune it, but the ultimate consequence of this has to be leadership that once again sets our sights on the stars and gives us the tools to get there.

"Toward a New American Security" is exactly the right title for this forum. We are in a moment of profound change and challenge that requires new thinking and a new direction. As Americans we bear much responsibility for the global economic, technological, and democratic revolution we are experiencing.
Every day the world grows smaller and history moves faster. Decisions by a factory owner in China impact the health and safety of children in Chicago. American researchers use the web to share best practices вЂ“ but so do Islamist extremists. And pandemics do not know where evil nations end and good nations begin, a fact that I'm sure greatly disturbs the Vice President.

Amidst the global transformation to an interdependent world our nation confronts possibilities of promise and peril. We know the current security policy with its excessive reliance on unilateral force, its rejection of international agreements of all kinds, and its preference for policy making based on ideology, not evidence, has to change.

But let's begin with some basic assumptions rooted in reality. In this interdependent world, the United Stated cannot unilaterally kill, jail, occupy or isolate all of our actual or potential adversaries. Therefore, while a strong military remains essential to our security, it is not sufficient.

Moreover, there are few security challenges we can meet entirely on our own. So in the words of Secretary Albright, "We should cooperate with others whenever we can and act alone only when we have to. Not the other way around."

When I was First Lady, I was honored to visit 82 countries representing our nation. I witnessed the promise of America in the eyes of men, women and children. America represented hope, opportunity, freedom. As a United States Senator I continue to meet with leaders from around the globe and as a member of the Senate Armed Services Committee, travel to places where our military has been engaged and performing heroically.

And what we have seen here and around the world is that the administration has systematically broken down and thrown aside our hard-won partnerships and alliances and undermined our greatest asset, America's moral authority - not just destroying the work of the previous decade but the difficult work of more than a half century of internationalism practiced by Democratic and Republican administrations alike. All too often the administration has favored ideology over reality, promoted tough talk over tough decisions, and sown alienation instead of cooperation.

The next president will take office at a time when the United States faces the greatest confluence of challenges in our country's recent history. We must regain our place in the world with a new security policy that serves our national interest, recaptures our moral authority, works with our allies, modernizes our military, and confidently projects our values. In short, we must rebuild our strength and widen and deepen its scope.

We have to be both internationalists and realists. We have to renew those alliances around the world, around a common set of goals including combating genocide, expanding human rights, promoting reconciliation through diplomacy, stopping nuclear proliferation, and addressing global warming. We have to realize that we are in the middle of a sectarian civil war in Iraq and that it is well past time to start withdrawing our troops in the middle of that war. And we must also realize that the global threat of terror demands that we secure our home front, take on the terrorist networks abroad, and combat a false doctrine of hate, death and destruction.

America must be the world's leader and yet we cannot lead unless we restore the greatness and goodness of America in the eyes of the world. That's why we must stand for freedom and fairness, justice and progress, peace and security.

Let me say a few words about Iraq. I know that CNAS has released a new report on Iraq with a set of proposals for the way forward. I have some differences with the specifics of the proposal, but I believe it is time to end the war and bring our troops home as soon as possible.

The failed ideology and flawed decision making that led us into Iraq has had a devastating impact on us here at home and around the world. Iraq continues to steal young American lives and to consume $8.6 billion a month, sapping our military readiness and standing. I traveled to Iraq three times to meet with soldiers and commanders as well as the Iraqi political leaders. There is no doubt that our military has performed heroically and has done what they were asked to do according to the authorization that was passed nearly five years ago.

Not a day goes by that I don't think of our men and women who are over there right now, patrolling the streets of Baghdad, Mosul, and other places, trapped by a failed strategy and sectarian civil war and I never stop thinking about the lives that have been lost and the lives that have been so drastically affected by profound injuries.

The president claims he listens to our military commanders - but he apparently doesn't hear what I have heard for several years now. General Petraeus, General Casey, General Pace, General Abizaid, Admiral Fallon and others have told him and us: there is no military solution to the Iraq conflict, only a political one.

Without concerted U.S.-led international political and diplomatic efforts, as the Iraq Study Group supported but the Bush Administration disregards, any Iraqi government is condemned to failure. In the absence of credible and strong incentives backed by U.S. pressure, the Iraqi government has degenerated into protecting ethnic and sectarian interests. In the absence of sustained diplomatic efforts involving the parties affected and the nations in the region, we risk the expansion of the conflict beyond the borders of Iraq.

The coalition building efforts during the first Gulf War and affecting the former Yugoslavia demonstrate that sustained political and diplomatic efforts are critical to establishing and maintaining U.S. national security interests. What worked for the first Bush administration and the Clinton administration has been abandoned or executed poorly. It is not a matter of partisanship; it is a matter of learning from lessons of successful American statesmanship of both Democratic and Republican presidents.

The catalog of misjudgments offends common sense and shocks the conscience: the unilateral decision to rush to war without allowing inspectors to finish their work or diplomacy to run its course; the failure to send enough troops and the disgraceful lack of equipment for those we sent; the draining of manpower, resources and intelligence capabilities from Afghanistan; the inability to stop rioting or to secure weapons caches; dismantling Iraq's security and governmental capacity; the ignorance of a rising insurgency; and the adherence, which continues to the present day, to a broken policy more than four years after the invasion began.

Since 2005, I've called for the strategic redeployment of U.S. Forces out of Iraq. I've introduced the Iraq Troops Protection and Reduction Act to begin withdrawing our troops. And I continue to press for a basic three step approach that would end the war while preserving our security interests. First, start bringing the troops home now. Second, demand, and back up those demands, that the Iraqis take responsibility for their country or lose the aid we are providing them. And third, begin intensive regional and international diplomacy on a sustained basis.

We need to force the administration to change its failed policies in Iraq. That's why I've gone further and with Senator Robert Byrd proposed de-authorizing the war by October 11, 2007, the five year anniversary of the original use of force resolution. Senator Byrd and I plan to offer an amendment de-authorizing the war when the Senate considers the Defense Authorization bill after the July 4th recess. It's a civil war in Iraq and we must extricate ourselves from it.

I've also called on both the Secretary of Defense, Secretary Gates, and General Pace, to brief Congress on the existing plans for the withdrawal of US troops from Iraq or to explain why no such detailed plans exist. The seeds of many problems that continue to plague our troops and mission in Iraq were planted in a failure to adequately plan for the conflict that the administration was so anxious to begin. We cannot allow our failures in deploying into Iraq to be repeated when we redeploy out of Iraq.

Among the most important reasons for extricating ourselves from Iraq are the looming challenges in the region and around the world to our national security. There is a global threat of terrorism and we have to confront it. Here, too, the policies of the Bush Administration have set us back.

America must rely on the intelligence of our allies along with our own, yet the Bush Administration's policies have alienated our friends and emboldened our enemies. New threats require us to modernize and reform our intelligence services. And we find ourselves often trapped in very short-sighted, unproductive debates triggered by the President's and Vice President's desire to expand executive authority beyond any previously imagined limit. It is dangerous for us to be caught up in debates about wiretapping schemes and it is dangerous for the administration to refuse to disavow torture.

We are in a long term struggle in which our values must be more than rhetoric. But we are weakened by Guantanamo and Abu Ghraib and by this administration's policies on detainees and torture.

I voted against the Military Commissions Act because I believe we have to stand for the rule of law before the world, especially when we are under threat. Democrats and Republicans alike believe that terrorists have to be caught, captured, sentenced, punished, killed. I believe there should be no mercy for those who perpetrated 9-11 and other crimes against humanity. But in the process of accomplishing what is essential for our security we must hold onto our values and set an example we can point to with pride and not shame.

The bill allowed the admission into evidence of statements derived from cruel, inhumane, and degrading interrogations. Will our enemies be less likely to surrender? Will informants be less likely to come forward? Will our soldiers be more likely face torture themselves if captured? Will the information we obtain be less reliable? As Lieutenant [General] John F. Kimmons, the Army's Deputy Chief of Staff for Intelligence has said, "No good intelligence is going to come from abusive interrogation practices." Allowing coercive treatment and torturous actions toward prisoners violates the rule of law, fails in intelligence gathering, and promotes radicalization.

Al-Zawahri, Osama bin Laden's second-in-command, the architect of many of the attacks on our country, throughout Europe and the world has said over and over again if we would only pay attention вЂ“ it is on their websites вЂ“ that torture helps the cause of extremism, watering the seeds of jihad. I've called for the closing of the prison at Guantanamo Bay because it represents in the eyes of the world abuse, secrecy, and contempt for the rule of law. Rather than keeping us more secure, Guantanamo is harming our national security. It compromises our long-term military and strategic interests and impairs our standing overseas.

We also cannot allow the failures taking place in Iraq to cause us to lose focus on the war in Afghanistan. The first time I visited Afghanistan in 2003, a young soldier said to me, "Welcome to the forgotten front line of the war against terror." This administration is not only failing in Iraq, its inattention risks failure in Afghanistan.

During my visit to Afghanistan last January, I heard disturbing reports about continued cross border infiltration from Pakistan into Afghanistan by Taliban and Al-Qaeda fighters. The tensions between the Afghan and Pakistani governments were palpable.

During my meetings with President Karzai and President Musharraf, I asked if they thought that a special presidential envoy from the United States would help them resolve their disputes and they both expressed the belief that such an envoy could be very useful. When I returned to the United States, I called the White House to suggest a special envoy and to convey the reactions of Presidents Karzai and Musharraf. The White House, however, did not follow up on this idea and the tensions between those two critical countries continue unabated.

We must widen the scope of our strength by leading strong alliances which can apply military force when required and promote our values. In the 1990's people were looking toward America for leadership. When ethnic cleansing was taking place in the Balkans, the United States led our European allies in putting together a coalition to stop it. There is no better way to combat anti-Americanism than to do our best to demonstrate that America is invested in lifting up people around the world.

Some of you have heard this before, but it was striking to me that after President Bush asked his father and my husband to represent our country with respect to the relief following the Tsunami -- they traveled together, they were there when our military was evacuating people and bringing in supplies -- and the public opinion about the United States increased dramatically in a positive direction based on that very visible show of American concern, most notably in Indonesia where there had been tracking of public attitudes toward us before and after.

Instability and extremism fester in places where infrastructure, education, and opportunity are also lacking. I've introduced the Education for All Act to provide $10 billion over five years toward the goal of basic education for every boy and girl around the world. From Pakistan to Sudan, parents want their children to have an education, but too often governments fail in delivering that basic service or find themselves without the resources to do so even if they are willing. Education is a tool to combat HIV/AIDS, empower women, and certainly for economic development. And I believe all of that plays to our strengths.

For six years, the threat of terror at home has not been met successfully with a lot of bluster and intimidation; that only isolates us. It's not right and it's not smart. The attacks which have been prevented are a result of cooperation with other nations in intelligence, law enforcement and money tracking efforts. And those kinds of cooperative relationships have to be deepened and strengthened.

Alliances are also essential in safeguarding against other security threats like pandemics, be they acts of terrorism or acts of God. And there needs to be better cooperation globally for us to be prepared to deal with these kinds of threats.

I think it's important that we also focus on the most significant threat of all: nuclear proliferation. The 9-11 Public Discourse Project, an outgrowth of the 9-11 Commission, argued that "preventing terrorists from gaining weapons of mass destruction must be elevated above all others problems of national security because it represents the greatest threat to the American people." We wouldn't know it by the discussion and dialogue in this city.

The Bush Administration has joined the chorus saying that, yes, that is our biggest threat. Unfortunately, their response has foundered at a nexus of ideology and intransigence. They have followed a policy that permitted North Korea, whose plutonium production was frozen by the last administration, to reprocess enough material in the last four years to make half a dozen nuclear bombs and test a nuclear weapon. In the past few months we've seen signs of reversal, but the damage is already done.

Iran, meanwhile, has been given six years of the silent treatment. In this vacuum, Iran continues its progress toward developing nuclear weapons and increasing its influence in the region. After initial talks with Iran and Syria on Iraq, the administration says it isn't sure that we need any more discussions with either of them. I think we should keep talking. Rather than engaging those who seek to develop nuclear weapons and working more urgently with allies to secure the nuclear material that al Qaeda and others covet, the administration has abandoned the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty and neglected non-proliferation and even promoted two new small nuclear weapons, including the robust nuclear earth penetrator, the so-called bunker buster.

I'm introducing the Nuclear Terrorism Prevention Act, a bill based on the report published by the Nuclear Threat Initiative, headed by Senator Sam Nunn. He clearly sees this threat "outrunning our response." And my bill seeks to reinvigorate and accelerate our efforts to ensure that the nature and urgency of our response is commensurate with the threat.

My legislation would first devote real resources to combating the threat by increasing funding for the Global Threat Reduction Initiative to convert research reactors around the world from highly enriched uranium to low enriched uranium and to remove the highly enriched uranium from such facilities.

I was with Warren Buffett last night who has pledged $50 million of his own money to this effort and believes that he could amass an even greater amount of money from the private sector if our government would lead us with some urgency toward taking on this challenge.

We need to expand the Materials Protection, Control and Accounting program to lock down nuclear material and invest in forensic measures which advance our ability to discover the origins of a nuclear weapon in the horrific event of an attack.

This legislation would also require the president to work to create specific international guidelines to raise the security standards at foreign nuclear sites. To paraphrase Harvard's Graham Allison, "no access to nuclear materials means no nuclear terrorism."

Third, to coordinate these efforts, my legislation would create a senior advisor to the president for the prevention of nuclear terrorism, responsible for an annual report to Congress listing all sites worldwide with nuclear weapons and weapons-usable fissile material and for developing and coordinating the implementation of a plan to eliminate, remove and secure all such material.

Here, too, we will never be served by policies that isolate us from those who can be our allies in stopping proliferation. And I hope that we will turn to this with greater urgency now. We cannot wait 18 months for the next administration. We should be focused on doing as much as possible as quickly as we can.

There are so many other challenges across the board from obviously the Middle East to Latin America, from the ongoing Israeli-Palestinian conflict to the ongoing violence in Darfur.

The next president will face a rising China with growing economic, diplomatic and military power. China is using its power throughout the world in new ways that challenge our current thinking and policies. We should neither fear a stronger China nor ignore it. That means engagement and understanding, but also frank dialogue on issues ranging from trade to currency manipulation to human rights abuses and the environment.

I remember traveling to China in 1995 to represent the United States at the Fourth World Conference on Women. Shortly before the conference was to start, the Chinese government imprisoned a dissident вЂ“ as some of you might remember вЂ“ and many felt that we shouldn't go in order to send a strong message of disapproval.

But I thought we should send another message. That's why I did go and spoke out about the importance of human rights and particularly emphasizing the importance of women's rights. I don't think we lose by speaking out and engaging with those with whom we disagree, even in profound ways.

Latin America presents another challenge, and, again, I think we have ignored developments in Latin America at our peril. The president came into office with great promise but unfortunately it has not been realized. And we must redouble our efforts to create better ties and look for specific projects of development that can perhaps make a difference.

The Clinton Foundation just announced a $200 million fund to do just that in Latin America, working for sustainable development and working to train people to do jobs connected with sustainable development.

Finally, we face serious challenges in Africa. In Sudan, Zimbabwe and other countries long-term conflicts, external and internal, persist. Certainly in the Horn of Africa we see Islamist extremists attempting to lay down roots. And we are watching the Chinese gain influence, building soccer stadiums and parliament buildings.

The Pentagon is creating a separate command for Africa, and I fully support that, but they're having a problem figuring out where to place it, because the countries of North Africa are not welcoming us the way that I believe they would have at a previous period.

We've seen what happens when we fail to focus on Africa. The genocide in Darfur is a prime example. The United Nations must do more to hold its member countries responsible for meeting basic human rights standards. And the United States must do more to create an environment in which countries are willing to place their resources at the disposal of the mission to end genocide.

We've got to look for ways that we can create these opportunities within Darfur. If Sudan does not live up to its commitment to allow a full hybrid U.N. and African Union peacekeeping force, we should work with NATO to take military action. I would suggest a no-fly zone that would be blanketed over Darfur and be focused on the air support that the Sudanese provide to the Janjaweed as they rape and pillage their way through the villages - the bombing comes before, during and after.

And I think it is time for us to make a much more serious effort both to support the troops on the ground with airlift and logistics, and to have the threat of the no-fly zone and action taken against those who violate it, in order for this new effort that the U.N. and the A.U. are proceeding with to be successful.

But there are some good news stories in Africa that we've got to do more to support, and I particularly am pleased about Liberia. We've seen the very impressive presidency of President Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf. Her commitment to good governance has served as a real example. We have supported debt relief for Liberia, and the Congress is passing that insofar as the American portion of it. But we've got to do more to help the country rebuild, and to try to create some examples of good governance and positive development in Africa with our help.

And, of course, there's global warming, a particular challenge that has security implications. Eleven retired three- and four-star admirals [and generals], including General Zinni, had come out with a report entitled, "National Security and the Threat of Climate Change." It concluded that global warming did present a serious national security threat because of its projected impacts on reduced access to fresh water and impaired food production, the displacement of populations, the mass migrations that will occur, the failed states, the conflicts over scarce resources.

I authored an amendment for the Defense Authorization bill to implement many of the recommendations of this report. It is not the first one. The Pentagon actually did their own report, several years ago, which never saw the light of day to any great extent. And it is time that we clearly focus on global warming as a security challenge.

Finally, there is a challenge we face right here at home in trying to figure out how to rebuild our military and transform our government to face the threats of the 21st century and to take advantage of the opportunities.

I'm a member of the Transformation Advisory Group, which is a part of the U.S. Joint Forces Command. I was asked to join several years ago.

It's a unique advisory group, charged with thinking of new ideas to move our military and government into a more forward leaning, forward thinking posture.

And it's important that we look at the lessons from this group's discussion, that it's not just about what the military can and must do, but how the rest of the government has to be value-added and work together in a much more coordinated way.

Our increasingly interconnected world demands an interconnected strategy that takes into account political, economic, diplomatic and military concerns. When developing military strategy, our military leaders no longer speak of the battlefield, but they talk about the situation. They are much more adept than many people actually understand, that the battlespace goes far beyond the battlefield. And we need that kind of multidimensional thinking, both inside and outside the walls of the Pentagon.

So let's make an effort to increase the number of soldiers proficient in foreign languages, instead of kicking out interpreters who happen to be gay. Let's be sure our policies reflect concern for the will of governments and the perceptions of peoples. Let's make sure that we look just not at the Quadrennial Defense Review but at a document that looks at all of the government's responses to the threats and opportunities we face.

You know, despite the professed attempts at military transformation, much more needs to be done. We do need to increase the size of the Army to address the myriad threats that we still face, even after we begin withdrawing from Iraq. We need to reform the Pentagon's acquisition system to rein in the costs of weapons systems and spending on outside contractors. And we need to find the right mix between legacy systems that our service members are currently using and newer programs that will allow us to keep our technological edge.Our experiences in Iraq and Afghanistan mean that we must not just learn but incorporate the lessons of asymmetric warfare and train and equip our forces accordingly.Finally, we need to re-evaluate the entire training and education that service members need in the 21st century.

Every challenge we face begins with the biggest challenge: restoring our leadership by once again valuing alliances, respecting our values, and understanding that American strength is more than just a show of force.

I want to end with a story that I particularly like, in part because it really does remind me of all that America can be when we have leadership that understands all that America should be.

It's a story that Secretary Albright has told. Back in 1995, she was asked to go to Europe to commemorate the 50th anniversary of the end of World War II.

And she was particularly excited about going because she would go to the Czech Republic, having been born and raised in the former Czechoslovakia and having confronted Nazism and communism through her family.

So as she traveled around to these various commemorations, she noticed people waving American flags. But as she looked more closely, she realized those flags had only 48 stars.

And she kept asking people, "Where did these flags come from?"

And everyone told her the same thing: when the American G.I.s liberated Europe, they passed out these flags. And people had treasured them, passing them on from grandparent to parent to child. And, in fact, keeping them at some risk to themselves, because if they'd been discovered under Soviet occupation with an American flag, they could have gotten into trouble.

So she asked them, "Why did you keep these flags for fifty years?"

And everyone said the same thing: because they loved America and they loved the hope that those flags represented and the values that stood behind them.

Well, I want to see a restoration of those feelings about us around the world. But I also want to see their restoration here at home.

We have to begin believing again in our goodness and our greatness, in our ability to be both smart and tough. You know, 44 years ago this month, President Kennedy spoke just a short distance from where we are today at American University. And he said, "I speak of peace because of the new face of war."

In this new century, we are confronted by yet another new face of war and a new reality of global interdependence. It is a moment of peril and of promise. How we proceed is entirely up to us. We can repair the damage that has been done to our security and our standing over these past six years. We can rebuild our alliances and restore our moral authority, and reestablish our leadership in the world. And by doing so, we can forge a new American security for this new century.

Thank you. It's an honor and a privilege to be back in Iowa. And I want to thank my good friend your former governor Tom Vilsack for that very generous introduction and for his leadership. During his campaign for the presidency he was one of the strongest voices for a change in the direction in Iraq. And I want to thank Tom and Christie for their friendship and their leadership in my campaign.
Today President Bush will speak once again to the nation about Iraq. Our message to the President is clear: it is time to begin ending this war. Not next year, not next month, but today. We have heard for years that as the Iraqis stand up, our troops will stand down. Every year we hear about how next year, they may start coming home. Now we are hearing a new version of that very familiar song from the President. He claims that we can, with slight adjustments, stay the course.

There are more troops in Iraq today then ever before. The Iraqi government is more fractured and less effective. The right strategy before the surge and the right strategy now -- post-escalation -- is the same. Start bringing our troops home.

America needs a president with the strength and experience to end this war. I will be that president. Our brave men and women who wear the uniform of our country deserve nothing less. As a senator and as a member of the Senate Armed Services Committee, I have had the privilege of meeting with many veterans in Iraq, here in Iowa and across America. They represent the very best of our country. When called on, they respond, serving with tremendous courage, dedication, and honor -- many of them from our national guard and reserves. And many of them not just once, but with multiple tours of duty.

Each mission they were given, they completed. They conducted a thorough search for weapons of mass destruction in Iraq -- and found none. They removed Saddam Hussein from power -- and brought him to justice. They helped the citizens of Iraq organize elections -- and vote for new leaders. They gave the Iraqi government the space and time to act -- if they chose to do so.

But over the past four years, the situation in Iraq has dramatically deteriorated. The mission today is more about policing a civil war than building a democracy. Our troops now serve alongside Iraqi Army officers and soldiers. Some have their loyalty to Iraq. Others, however, are loyal to sectarian militias -- some of whom serve bravely alongside our soldiers. Others have looked the other way when insurgents plant bombs. Some even have taken up arms against Americans.

And our troops are paying the price. 3,598 of them have lost their lives -- 43 from right here in Iowa. These past three months have been the deadliest quarter on record, with 331 fatalities. One Army chaplain told a reporter that he tries to read a unique passage from Scripture over the body of each soldier who has been killed in his unit. But the casualties have been so heavy, he has nearly run out of suitable verses.

Then there are the wounded. More than 26,000 so far. Many hurt so badly, they will never fully recover. Many more with "invisible wounds" -- depression, anxiety, Post Traumatic Stress Disorder, Traumatic Brain Injury. Young people in the prime of their lives unable to work, struggling to relate to their families and reintegrate into their communities.

Many aren't getting the treatment they need. Some have turned to drugs or alcohol. A few have even taken their own lives.

Then there are the families, who pay their own price for this war. Struggling to raise children alone -- trying to find the right answer to all those questions about when mom or dad is coming home. Some forced to explain that mom or dad is never coming home. Our troops' sacrifice is their sacrifice too.

Then there is the price the Iraqis have paid. Tens of thousands civilians -- and several thousand members of the Iraqi security forces -- have been killed. Millions of Iraqis have fled their homes -- nearly 100,000 a month -- under threat of execution by sectarian militias and kidnappings by criminal gangs.

Then there are the financial costs. More than $450 billion so far. At the current rate of spending, we could provide access to high quality pre-kindergarten for every four year-old in America, extend health care to all 45 million Americans who are currently uninsured, and make college more affordable for more than one million students.

Then there is our work in Afghanistan, yet another casualty of the war in Iraq. When I first visited there in 2003, I was greeted by a soldier who said: "Welcome to the forgotten frontlines in the war against terror."

Distracted by Iraq, we have squandered much of what our military accomplished in Afghanistan, eroded our position among the Afghan people, limited the potential of President Karzai's moderate government, and failed to stem the renewed aggression by the Taliban and al Qaeda.

For while the Bush administration has neglected Afghanistan, the terrorists and drug-traffickers have not. A recent UN report found that Afghanistan's production of opium -- the raw material for heroin -- increased nearly 50 percent last year, to a total that was more than 90 percent of the world's illicit opium production in 2006. The heroin trade finances the very Taliban fighters and al Qaeda terrorists who are attacking our troops and gaining new footholds in parts of Afghanistan.

The catalogue of miscalculations, misjudgments, and mistakes in Iraq shocks the conscience. From the unilateral decision to rush to a preemptive war without allowing the inspectors to finish their work or waiting for diplomacy to run its course; to the failure to send enough troops or provide proper equipment for them; to the denial of a rising insurgency and the failure to adjust the military strategy; to continued support for a government unwilling to make the necessary political compromises; to the adherence to a broken policy more than four years after the invasion began.

As a result of these failures, the next President will inherit some of the greatest foreign policy challenges in our history. Rising terrorism and extremism. Frayed alliances. And the increasingly difficult task of restoring American leadership in a world that has come to view our nation with suspicion and mistrust.

We cannot effectively address any of these challenges if we continue our military engagement in Iraq. As long as we stay there, our military strength will continue to erode. Our standing in the world will continue to decline. Our enemies in the region will continue to exploit our failures. Our occupation will continue to serve as a recruitment tool for terrorists. Our support for Afghan democracy, our conflict with the Taliban, and our hunt for al Qaeda will continue to be compromised. And our brave men and women will continue to lose their lives and suffer grievous wounds.

Finally, some of the most respected members of the President's own party in the Senate are beginning to acknowledge these realities. Senator Lugar, ranking member of the Foreign Relations Committee, and a leading voice on foreign affairs for decades, just recently stated his opposition to staying the course in Iraq. Senators Voinovich and, most recently, Senator Domenici, have also called on President Bush to change course.

After more than four years, more than $450 billion, and human costs beyond measure, it is abundantly clear that there is no military solution to the crisis in Iraq.

It is long past time that the president ended American combat involvement Iraq's multi-sided, sectarian civil war, fought for power, revenge, and personal advantage.

That is what I have been trying to do in the Senate, after calling for and consistently voting for phased redeployment of our troops out of Iraq. That is why I voted against a bill to fund the war without any plan for ending it. That is why I've introduced legislation to begin bringing our troops home within 90 days. And that is why I am joining other Democrats to add provisions to the defense authorization bill -- which we are debating in the Senate this week -- that would force the President to change course in Iraq. Among those provisions is legislation I am sponsoring with Senator Robert Byrd to de-authorize the war -- legislation that would actually end the President's authority to fight it. I hope and pray that a bi-partisan majority of the Congress will be able to persuade or force the President to change course.

In September, General David Petraeus, the Commanding General in charge of Iraq, will issue a report on the progress of the surge. If the past is any guide, the President may still decide to maintain his failed strategy, regardless of what the report says, just as he rejected the thoughtful recommendations of the bi-partisan Iraq Study Group.

If that happens -- if the President refuses to end this war before he leaves office -- when I'm President, I will -- quickly, responsibly, and in a way that will restore -- not weaken -- America's leadership in the world.

This will be my first and most important mission as President -- one I believe I have the strength and experience to complete. Today, I want to lay out my three point plan for how I would achieve this -- how, as President, I would bring our troops home, work to bring stability to the region, and replace a military force with a new diplomatic initiative to engage countries around the world in securing Iraq's future and America's national security interests.

The most important part of my plan is the first step: to end our military engagement in Iraq's civil war and immediately start bringing our troops home as quickly and carefully as possible. No permanent occupation of the country. No more neighborhood patrols. No more being caught in the middle of a war whose side we do not even know we should be on.

At the end of the day, the Iraqis are responsible for Iraq's future. And if we have learned anything these past four years, it's that we cannot successfully police a civil war. Therefore, keeping our troops in the crossfire of sectarian violence is not the answer. Bringing them home swiftly and responsibly is.

As President, I will convene the Joint Chiefs of Staff, my Secretary of Defense and my National Security Council and direct them to draw up a clear, viable plan to bring our troops home starting within the first 60 days of my Administration.

We should do this as quickly as we can, consistent with preserving our security and protecting our troops. I have been long worried that the Pentagon is not adequately planning for the withdrawal of our troops because the White House does not want them to plan for withdrawal.

I have written the Secretary of Defense as well as the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and asked them to please let us know in Congress what plans they have. Withdrawing troops is dangerous and difficult. Especially when we will have to convoy our troops and their equipment out of Iraq along the very same roads that are booby-trapped with explosive devices. It requires enormous care and precision, and I hope we will start that process before I'm president. We should redeploy our troops steadily and consistently, not in fits and starts.

And as we bring our troops home, we must ensure that we are fully prepared to care for them -- and their families -- once they have returned. So as the Joint Chiefs and Defense Secretary are drawing up a redeployment plan, I will direct the Department of Defense and the Department of Veterans Affairs to prepare a comprehensive plan to provide the highest quality health care, disability benefits, and social services for every single servicemember -- including every member of the National Guard and Reserve. And I will make sure this plan is promptly implemented.

Today, we are not providing the care our veterans deserve. We have all heard the heartbreaking stories about soldiers languishing in filthy, decrepit facilities. The facilities at Walter Reed were a disgrace which our President recently referred to as, and I quote, "some bureaucratic red-tape issues."

But sadly, the Walter Reed scandal is just the tip of a nasty iceberg. Today, we have veterans across America who struggle with traumatic brain injury and other wounds, and are told to take a number and wait in line for months. Veterans trying to get disability pay are running into a wall of indifference from their own government. Military families trying to get life insurance benefits they are entitled to are drowning in delay and rejection.

When our young men and women put on our country's uniform -- when they go into harm's way for our American family --they are our sons and daughters and it's past time we started treating them that way.

That's what I've tried to do in the Senate, by expanding health care for our National Guard and Reserve Members, sponsoring legislation to increase military survivor benefits from $12,000 to $100,000, authoring the Heroes at Home legislation to help servicemembers and their families deal with post traumatic stress disorder and traumatic brain injury.

As President, I'll propose guaranteed funding for our VA health care system. And a GI Bill of Rights for the twenty-first century to help veterans buy their own homes, build their own businesses, attend college and get the training they need for good, high-paying jobs.

The second part of my plan involves working to secure stability within Iraq as we bring our troops home. Right now, the Iraqi government is failing its citizens. Government officials refuse to take the steps needed to advance a political solution, improve the economy and better the lives of ordinary Iraqis. They refuse to do their part to quell sectarian violence -- and some have even chosen to participate in it.

As President, I will focus American aid efforts during our redeployment on stabilizing Iraq, not propping up the Iraqi government. Financial resources will only go where they will be used properly. We will no longer funnel money to those government ministries and ministers that hoard it, seal it, or waste it. If, by the time I take office, Iraq's central government has proven that it's committed to rebuilding the country and striving for sustainable stability and political reconciliation, we'll send aid to that government. If not, we'll consider providing aid to provincial governments and reliable non-governmental organizations that are making progress.

I will also urge the appointment of a high level U.N. representative -- similar to those appointed in Afghanistan, Bosnia and Kosovo -- to help broker peace among the parties in Iraq. This representative will press the Iraqis to achieve defined political objectives that will help Iraqis build a stake in their country, including, most importantly, the equitable distribution of oil revenues, so that everyone gets their fair share, and ordinary Iraqis start feeling like they have a stake in the country's future.

I have promoted the idea of an oil-trust for more than three years because I believe it would help convince Iraqis that they will benefit from a stable Iraq more than the continuing sectarian conflict. I tried to get the Bush administration to adopt this idea which we did in Alaska. When Alaska was discovered to have oil, every Alaskan gets checked so every Alaskan has a stake in making sure that the pipeline is safe and that the process continues. And I believe it would have made such a difference immediately if the United States when we were still the occupying power had created such an oil-trust. I'm told that my idea which didn't have Republican support got as far as the Vice President's office where a lot of good ideas apparently die.

Third, as we redeploy our troops, we will replace our military force in Iraq with an intensive, diplomatic initiative in the region. To bring about long-term stability in Iraq and prevent violence and unrest from spilling over to other parts of the area, one of the most dangerous parts of the world to begin with.

This will be a first step towards restoring Americans moral and strategic leadership in the world-- one that draws on the strength of our alliances and the power of our diplomacy, and uses military force as a last -- not a first -- resort.

Over the past four years, we have learned the hard way about the need for a truly multilateral approach in Iraq, one built on sound strategy and long-range planning, not ideology and wishful thinking. The President's go-it-alone attitude has diminished our position in the region and around the world. And our diminished position, in turn, has made it increasingly difficult for us to bring about a political solution in Iraq.

Our relationship with Turkey is just one example. Six years ago, at the end of the Clinton administration, support for the U.S. in Turkey -- a longtime ally in NATO -- stood at over 50 percent. Today, according to a recent Pew study, it's at just nine percent. This is the most spectacular deterioration of relations with a treaty ally in memory.

So we've dug ourselves into a pretty deep hole, haven't we? But I am confident we can dig ourselves out. I believe we can return to a foreign policy through which, as my friend, former Secretary of State Madeleine Albright once said, we "cooperate with others whenever we can and act alone only when we have to. Not the other way around." I believe we can restore our standing in the world, and begin to restore stability in Iraq, by restoring our use of meaningful diplomacy in the region.

That starts with drawing down our troops and drawing upon the international community to make a commitment to Iraq's future. So in my first days in office, I'll begin work to convene a regional stabilization group composed of key allies, other global powers, and all of the states bordering Iraq. The mission of this group will be to develop and implement a strategy to create a stable Iraq.

Working with the United Nations Representative, the group will first work to convince Iran, Saudi Arabia, Turkey, and Syria to refrain from getting involved in the civil war -- either directly or indirectly, by backing local militants and militias. None of these countries benefits if Iraq implodes and the resulting chaos spills over their borders. Although I believe our military disengagement will reduce the likelihood of regional interference in Iraq's internal affairs over the long run, I acknowledge that in the short run, there may well be increased violence and instability following our troop withdrawals.

In Bosnia, before the US-led NATO actions resulted in the Dayton Peace Accords, the sectarian violence claimed 200,000 lives and created two million refugees. And Iraq has six times as many people.

So unless the leaders of the various insurgent groups, and militias and the government change course, they could reach the per capital Bosnian casualty rates, claiming hundreds of thousands more Iraqi lives and causing millions more to flee. This tragic possibility, however, does not justify continuing our failed policy, but it does intensify the importance of the other elements of my plan.

The U.N. led group will attempt to mediate among the different sectarian groups in Iraq with the goal of attaining compromises on fundamental issues like the structure of their new government, the contours of their economic policy, and a system for dividing their oil revenues. This will no doubt be difficult. But achieving agreement on issues like these is a critical step for building a stable future for Iraq.

Third, the members of the group will hold themselves and other countries to their past pledges to provide funding to Iraq. And they'll encourage additional contributions to meet Iraq's extensive needs.

As it stands now, the United States is shouldering far too great a share of the financial burden for rebuilding Iraq. As of February 2007, foreign donors had made good on only about 4 billion dollars of the 15 billion in pledges from the Madrid Conference. Some wealthy Gulf nations have come up especially short. Countries around the world also have a stake in Iraq's future -- and they should contribute to securing it.

Let me say a word about the place of Iran and Syria in this new, diplomatic initiative. There is no question that these two regimes are among the most difficult and dangerous in the world. They pose direct threats to their neighbors, to Israel, our strategic ally and friend, and far beyond the region. Iran's President has hosted a conference devoted to denying the Holocaust, placing him in company with the most despicable bigots and historical revisionists. And both countries sponsor terrorism -- directly, and indirectly through Hezbollah and Hamas.

Unfortunately, for most of the past six years, President Bush has adopted a simple and fundamentally flawed strategy for dealing with these countries: we don't talk to bad people.

I think you agree with me that we strongly disagree with this approach. Even during the Cold War, we never stopped speaking to the Soviet Union. Even when they had thousands of missiles pointed at us. Even when their leaders threatened to bury us. Even when they were invading countries and inciting military uprisings around the world. That was the smart policy -- one embraced by both Democrats and Republicans.

We know this approach can be as effective now as it was back then. Look what happened when the Administration -- after six years of neglect during which North Korea built up its nuclear program -- finally pursued aggressive, face-to-face talks with North Korea. We got them to agree to suspend their nuclear weapons program -- and we didn't have to sacrifice a single American life to achieve that goal.

We ended the genocide and ethnic cleansing in the Balkans without sacrificing a single American life. The Administration should learn from the progress made in North Korea and take a similar approach toward Iran and Syria. While they did meet recently with Iranian officials, they now appear reluctant to continue that effort.

When I am President, we will deal with Syria and Iran right from the beginning, we will engage them in open, frank, tough-minded discussions about the status of Iraq. And we will convey our strong, bi-partisan position that Iran cannot be allowed obtain nuclear weapons.

Now, let me be clear: engagement does not mean a warm embrace. I have no illusions about Iran and Syria. But, we must also be realistic. Diplomacy is difficult and time-consuming. It is frustrating at times, and it may not bear fruit. But it is the best tool we have, given the challenges we face.

As we are leaving Iraq -- and after we have left -- we need to engage the world in a global humanitarian effort to confront the human costs created by this war. That is the final component of our diplomatic initiative.

Since the start of the war, two million Iraqis have fled their country -- mainly to Jordan and Syria -- and two million more have been displaced from their homes and neighborhoods within Iraq. Many are living in desperate conditions, creating not just a humanitarian crisis, but one with strategic, security consequences for the region. That could become a direct threat to us.

As President, I will organize a multi-billion dollar international effort -- funded by a wide range of donor states -- under the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR). Through this initiative, the Commissioner for Refugees will direct aid to build infrastructure and create a social safety net in Jordan, Syria and other countries that have taken in refugees. This money will go to schools, hospitals and housing -- along with initiatives to create jobs and promote economic development. At the same time, the Commissioner for Refugees will be empowered to address the needs of Iraqis who have been displaced from their homes by the violence, but remain inside their country. These efforts will confront the challenges posed by large-scale refugee camps in Jordan, which could destabilize that country and the region.

For what we spend in just one month on this war -- $8 billion dollars, plus -- the world can fund this refugee initiative for an entire year and then some. These funds will help ensure a long term solution -- one that addresses the fundamental needs of refugees, rather than resorting to the limited and often counter-productive solution of refugee camps. I stress that because we have to be very careful; not to create cauldrons of distress and outrage, by putting these people into these refugee camps and leaving them there.

While we will focus our efforts on improving conditions so that Iraqis don't have to flee in the first place, we will also recognize our moral obligation to help those we have put at risk in Iraq -- the interpreters, the soldiers and the workers who have assisted our troops. I have been to Iraq three times. I have met these great people who cast their bond with America. Many of them have been assassinated and members of their families as well. I believe we owe an obligation, particularly to them.

So as part of this global humanitarian effort, governments in both the Middle East and the West as well as here in the United States, have to take in asylum seekers, with the Commissioner of Refugees developing a plan to help them return to Iraq once the country has stabilized.

Engaging in this humanitarian effort will not require continued military involvement on our part. Just the opposite, in fact. We need to redeploy our troops out of Iraq before we can undertake this diplomatic initiative with any hope for success.

Finally, as we do bring our troops home, we cannot lose sight of our very real strategic national interests in this region. If, in the future, Iraq becomes a breeding ground for exporting terrorists, as it appears it already is, as we are learning about those who planned and tried to carry out the attacks in London. That is a great worry for our country. So as we redeploy our troops from Iraq, I will not let down my guard against terrorism. I will devote the resources we need to fight it and fight it smartly. I will order specialized units to engage in narrow and targeted operations against al Qaeda and other terrorist organizations in the region.

They will also provide security for U.S. troops and personnel and train and equip Iraqi security services to keep order and promote stability in the country, but only to the extent we believe such training is actually working. I would also consider, as I have said before, leaving some forces in the Kurdish area to protect the fragile but real democracy and relative peace and security that has developed there.

And as President, I will work to ensure a stable and peaceful relationship between Turkey and the Kurds in Northern Iraq, both of whom are our friends and allies. We must not permit a conflict between these two allies to become another consequence of the Iraq war.

Our efforts must also involve a regional recommitment to success in Afghanistan. The Taliban is resurging; they and their al Qaeda allies must not succeed. As President, I will not allow us to fail in Afghanistan. We simply cannot allow al Qaeda to reclaim the country as its safe haven or the Taliban to re-establish its repressive regime.

Now, will any of this be easy? Of course not. It's going to take tremendous discipline, patience and hard work. But I believe it can be done. I believe we can be a lot smarter about getting out of this war than we were about getting into it. The future of our national security and international standing depends upon it. And we owe our troops -- and their families -- nothing less.

I want to end by telling you about one of those service members -- a Chief Warrant Officer in the Iowa Army National Guard, named Bruce Smith, from West Liberty, Iowa. My friend, Tom Vilsack, told me about Bruce Smith and his courageous wife, Oliva. Bruce was deployed to Iraq, in November 2003 the Chinook helicopter he was piloting was shot down near Fallujah. Bruce had to make a split-second decision about how to maneuver the helicopter. One choice would possibly save his life. The other would possibly save his crewmates. Bruce chose to save his crew. And while he and his co-pilot were killed, 17 members of his crew survived. His wife, Oliva has said that in those few seconds, those 17 men needed Bruce more than she and her children would need him for the rest of their lives.

Bruce Smith made his choice. He chose to be there for his soldiers. It's the choice that so many of our brave men and women in uniform make for each other, and for our country, every single day. Now it's time we made the same choice for them. It's time we honored their service by bringing them home.

If you give me the chance to serve as your President, that will be my first -- and highest -- priority.

Thank you very much.

I want to thank Howard, and John Tabor, and everyone associated with Seacoast Media Group. This is a wonderful idea and a beautiful facility for all of us to meet talk about issues. And I am delighted that the candidates have been invited to come and address you and to answer your questions about some of the really significant challenges we face as a country. The seacoast here in New Hampshire is a perfect place for this conversation. You have many different forms of energy within a very short distance from where we are right now: nuclear, coal, oil, wood. You've got people who are working on harnessing the power of the tides. You've got wind. You have some very exciting local initiatives that you've undertaken by towns across New Hampshire. And certainly here in Portsmouth, Mayor, what you've done to make a real commitment to cleaner energy, more energy efficient buildings, and the lead designation that you got for the library. All of that is really demonstrating so strongly how important it is that local communities be a part of the solution.
There's a lot of evidence, as Howard also talked about, that New Hampshire suffers from the failure of the national government to do what we should be doing with respect to energy and global warming. And in very specific terms the impact of pollution, ozone, smog, particulates, mercury that come and deposit themselves on New Hampshire even though they are not produced in this state.

When we talk about what we need to do at the federal level, and what I want to do as president, deal with our twin problems of improving our energy system by becoming more independent, therefore, more secure and more efficient. It is also a way we will approach global warming, which will begin to deal with greenhouse gas emissions. Both of those efforts will have an impact on the quality of the environment and begin to reduce some of the damage that is done by the power plants far away from here that drop acid rain and other kinds of pollutants onto you as it does the Adirondacks and the Hudson River in New York. I've done a lot of work on that. So this is an interrelated issue, and I think it's important that we consider it in that way. Because all too often we talk about energy, we have a kind of stovepipe discussion about that. Then we talk about global warming or climate change and we talk about that. And then I also like to talk about the health impact from the environment because I think that's another issue that has to be related. So what I want to do in 20 minutes or so and then get to your questions is talk a little bit about what I'd like to do to address all these issues. And some of it has to come from the federal government, but some of it has to be this partnership that you are so clearly pursuing at the state and local level. But then we also have to address what we can do as individuals. In our homes, and our businesses, our driving habits, and everything else, because we have to have a united front in order to address energy and global warming and environmental health.

Let me say, about energy: we all know that we are dependent on foreign oil. We know that about a third of our trade deficit comes from the fact that we have an insatiable appetitive for foreign oil. We are using more money than we were before 9/11. And much of the money that we spend importing and using this foreign oil goes to regimes that are unfriendly to many of our (inaudible). So, we have to address our dependence on foreign oil as a security issue. And its not that these regimes are unstable and unfriendly. But there is one area in Saudi Arabia where 1 out of every 12 gallons of gasoline is produced. If there were an accident or an attack on that site, it would throw the global economy into a tailspin. This is an imperative and frankly, we have been unwilling to face up to this for a number of reasons. Among them are the great power of the oil companies and gas companies: the influence they have in Washington. The fact that after the first oil shock in the 1970s when OPEC came into existence and used their powers as a cartel to really squeeze oil supply and raise demand and prices. You know, we all stood in line and waited to get our cars filled up. I can remember that, getting to a gas station at 5 o'clock in the morning, remember, we were all determined to do something about it. And to Jimmy Carter's credit, he did try, he put into effect a number of provisions that were at least aimed at weaning us off foreign oil, make us more energy conscious and efficient. And then the price of gas fell, because remember it can be manipulated; anybody who tells you its just market supply is naive. It can be manipulated and it has been.

The price of gas dropped, so we all go 'oh good, back to low gas prices.' Political pressure's off, we're back to looking for really low gas prices. My late father, we would drive 100 miles to buy gas, in a gas war: you know you have two gas stations one on each side of the street, one would be at 20 cents the other would be at 21. We had that mentality, that's how we grew up that somehow there was an inexhaustible supply that could carry us anywhere we canted in our automobiles. Well, what happened? So, President Reagan came in, totally eliminated all the energy efficiency and conservation and technology research programs that President Carter put in and as citizens, that was fine with us, we were back to cheap gas prices. Now, two places didn't do that. Brazil said 'we don't want to be dependent of foreign oil.' And they began a long-term research project with led to their use of ethanol from sugar cane, which they produce in great quantities. They are e practically independent from imported foreign oil now, because they didn't give up. Political winds blew and changed but they kept on this research project. California did not change their energy conservation laws. They kept stressing energy conservation and in fact, today, in California, the per capita usage of electricity in California has remained constant. Whereas it has gone 50 percent in the rest of the country because we didn't have laws and we didn't have public information campaigns. We can do this. Sometimes, when I talk about getting off of foreign oil and becoming more efficient and conservation minded, somebody who has been brainwashed by the republicans and the oil companies says 'we can't do that, we'll ruin the economy.' Well, the fact is, Brazil did it and California has done and these are just tow things we can do if we are serious about our oil security. When it comes to conservation and energy efficiency, you have a program that we are all familiar with, if you live in cold states like New Hampshire and New York and elsewhere is the weatherization program. Now, it's sending out people to actually weatherize homes, to make them more energy efficient. Out of the weatherization program we've created about 8000 jobs around the country. You can create about 50 jobs in every million dollars you invest in energy efficiency. So, we have 8000 jobs from doing what makes sense: weatherizing peoples homes, helping them save money. Because we know that low income people, people that should be eligible for LIHEAP but do not always get the money because it keeps being cut. One in three forgo medical or dental services for energy reason. They have to pay heat or cool in come parts of the country. And one in four forgo rent or mortgage assistance or they pay forgo for the heat and pay their mortgage instead. So, we know that we can make progress in this area if we are smart about it and create new good jobs. Today I'm announcing another one o my plans, in dealing with this and that is to create a fund called the Green Building Fund: 1 billion dollars a year that will be given in grants to states and localities to help make buildings more efficient and by the way, put 50000 people to work. So we know that we can create millions of jobs if we are smart about how we go about dealing with energy and global warming and the Building Fund would be one example that is very specific about how we would do that. The other parts of my energy security plan would be to create a 50 billion dollar fund. The model for this comes from things we've already done: the Apollo program, the Manhattan Program that we were so good at as Americans. We would see our challenges and would go about meeting them. Well, energy security and global warming are the two greatest technical challenges we confront, just like sending a man to the moon or building an atomic bomb were in the earlier generation. And so what I am proposing is the Strategic Energy Fund that would be funded with 50 billion dollars. Ten billion dollars would come from the oil companies pay royalties on drilling on public land. They have escaped from paying their fair share. Public lands are just that and they need to be paying more. 20 billion would come from removing the tax subsidies that have been increased under the bush administration, remove the tax subsidies from the oil companies, they don't need it they've been making more money than anyone has ever made in the history of the world and that 20 billion will go into these strategic energy fund. The remaining 20 billion would come from a deal that I will offer the oil companies: here's the deal. You all have been hearing how the oil refineries are just all be shutting down. You know, gas is more than 3 dollars a gallon here on the seacoast and every time you turn around, you red about a refinery that had to shut down because it had a mechanical problem or it had some other kind of difficulty. Its just always intriguing to me that refineries shut down in the summer. It doesn't sound like a coincidence to me. And then the oil companies come back and say they don't have enough refinery capacity and the oil companies argue with you when you tell them that you want low sulfur diesel and we want the summer blend of gas and its all too complicated, apparently, for these enormous corporations to figure out. So here's the deal. They can either invest the remaining 20 billion dollars themselves in alternative technology, they can build clean, better refineries that will not break down all the time, they can take steps that will actually put them on the side of helping them to solve both our energy security issue and our global warming issue or we will tax their windfall profits. We will take an average of their profits between 2002 and 20000 whenever we get this passed and we will tae 50 percent above that level. There will be all kinds of crocodile tears and I can hear the guys on cable TV saying I'm going after the oil companies, well, I am going after the oil companies. And with good reason. They are a huge part of the problem we have and they refuse to be a part of the solution. And they have had a friend in the whit house named Dick Cheney who has protected them and helped them to profit so enormously. It is time for them to start contributing to America again.

The third thing is, as we go forward on this, we've got to have federal legislation explicitly to deal with global warming. Because what will be done with the strategic energy fund that I've just said (inaudible). We'll start with the 10 or 20 that we start with and go forward but we need to be putting all the technologies that are possibly out there for us on a very fast track. We need the very best minds in America, get our universities get our private sector laboratories get our government scientists all on the same page. Instead of having a president who will not utter the words global warming, we will have a global warming agenda. And we will also make it clear that as we move forward we want every American to participate, we want the best ideas. It is exciting to me that we could unleash a whole new era of innovation, lets call it Energy 2.0, lets be as creative with this as we were with information technology. It is exactly what I think will help tot spur American's competitiveness and put millions of Americans to work. I have signed on to the most aggressive cap and trade global warming bill that we have. Senator Boxer chairs who the environment committee on which I serve. Senator Sanders, your neighbor from Vermont. Have put forward a plan for an economy wide cap and trade system aimed at lowering greenhouse gas emissions, by 2050, 80 percent below the 1990 level. We will try to get the to 1990 level by 2020. I know these are aggressive targets. But I think that we have to set aggressive targets and set big goals to unleash the genius of the American economy. If you think about the internet, it was really a combination of government research, started in the 1950s after sputnik went up with something called the DARPA, we put billions dollars in, over time, helped to spur the space program, but that is also where the internet started. And people, literally, inventing in their garages and coming up with amazing ideas, being taken to market. So we now have what we see in the world today. The world wide net and all the advances we have. I'm not sure we even know today, what forms of energy we know we could be using in 50 years. That's something I am excited about. That is we really got serious about this, there may be a substitute for the internal combustion engine. You know, yes, right now, we are looking for ways to make it burn more cleanly, we are looking for better sources of fuel from cellulose ethanol and other sources, we're looking at hydrogen. I'm not even sure we know all the possibilities. I want young people to be as excited about pioneering energy and dealing with global warming as 20 30 years ago, people like bill gates were about pioneering the Internet. I also want to accelerate the use of alternative fuels, particularly in transportation. We just passed a senate energy bill a few weeks ago, we did several good things: we raised gas mileage,

Though there are many who wish who wish could've gone further and of course I understand that. But just getting fro 25 to 35 and getting the votes we have in the face of tremendous resistance, was a great step forward. We also did work very hard to increase the potential goal for ethanol. And we raised the ratio. People are starting to raise legitimate concerns about the impact of corn-based ethanol on life styles prices, on food prices, the effects on land. So what we've said is that we want to get to 36 million gallons but we want to reverse so we have 15 from corn ethanol and 21 from what's called cellulose ethanol, which is just about anything that grows to see whether we can get the energy out of the plant and turn it into ethanol that can be mixed with gas. And Dartmouth has done some very interesting work on this, creating a process to extract the sugar energy and the carbohydrate energy out of the plant based material and I'm excited because the first plant that will be built to see if the Dartmouth process works, will be in Rochester, New York.

So we're really going to see a lot of great work being done now with different forms of ethanol. We also need to look at what more we can do to try to encourage efficiency. I mentioned the green building fund. I've also introduced legislation with Senator Kerry, John Kerry, he and I have legislation to require that federal buildings get more efficient. The federal government owns or rents over 500,000 buildings around the country. They spend $5.6 billion heating, cooling, and powering those buildings and the fact is that if the federal government took the lead on making these buildings efficient, they would create a market that would help the all rest of us. Because you know the federal government is out their saying we want to have florescent bulbs, but we'd like them to have a somewhat better color of their light, than the usual florescent lights, can you come up with some new ideas. With a huge buyer like that, it would really move people. So that compact florescent bulbs might have (inaudible) somewhat softer light. And you know the big problem with florescent bulbs is that too many women tried on bathing suites in front of too many mirrors. And we don't like that color light. So you know my husband walks around the house with bags of compact fluorescents putting them in anywhere he can find a place. And we were taking about it the other day and he said the big objection with those is how to make them those have a slightly softer look to them. So that we all look good. And that's sort of the aesthetics of that. So there's a lot of research we could do there, and if the federal government would lead the way, it would move much more quickly.

We also know that right now we could make changes in a lot of our buildings. And I actually teamed up much to everyone's surprise with probably the Congress' leading skeptic on global warming, Jim Inhoffe, the senator from Oklahoma who chaired the environment committee for most of my time in the Senate when I served on the committee. But Senator Inhoffe and I just got passed in the energy bill a provision to tell the federal government to look at how they could power their buildings differently right now. Don't wait. Including looking a geothermal, which in many parts of the country has tremendous possibility. We've done some geothermal work in New York. There's a town Auburn, New York where geothermal is heating and cooling the city hall where their using geothermal in a few other of the facilities. We just want a lot of other different ideas to happen. Solar energy remains an under utilized source of power, particulary electricity. Other countries have moved much more quickly. Germany is getting a lot of their power from solar now. And they're not a tropical climate and yet they have a combination of government incentives and public education programs going on that had moved a lot of people towards photovoltaic cells on their roofs in their construction. We've got to figure out how to incentivize that. One of the problems we face is the resistance to using the tax structure to change behavior because by using the tax structure, you will move people away from fossil fuels, that's where the oil companies and the gas and the coal companies come back in. They don't want us to give a lot of tax incentives. We tried to do that in the energy bill, we got 57 bipartisan votes but we needed 60 under the rules of the senate, so we are going to go back and try again. But the reason we didn't is because if we put more tax money on more solar, more wind, more geothermal it would mean that the oil companies, coal companies, gas companies would obviously start losing market share. So we still have real political challenges here that we are going to try and address. Let me just finish by talking about 2 things that are really near and dear to me that I have worked on since 20012. I'm not new to these issues I care deeply about them and have been involved in them for a long time. The first was something that I understand a lot of your schools are doing and I couldn't find the real brochure so I brought this copy, but back in 2001 I sent out this brochure to every school district in New York and it says 'smart schools save energy.' Because I did a survey about how much money school districts, which are always hard pressed for money in New York and I know here in New Hampshire that most school spend more money on energy than they do on books or computer's. And by simple changes that might cost some front-end money, they would begin to save 25 to 30 percent through better building design, use of renewable energy technology and sensible changes in operation and maintenance. And that was back in 2001 because as a traveled around New York I realized there are a lot of old school buildings, they needed to be weatherized, they needed to be upgraded, with some initial investment, they could save a lot of money of the next 20 to 20 years. The other thing I've done over the last several years is work very hard with Rochester, New York, which, as you just heard is going to be the place of the plant that will use the Dartmouth technology. And I brought in the US green building council and other folks that were interested. And we created a green print for Rochester. We spent a couple of years doing it: bringing everyone to the table, private sector, public sector, outside experts and this report is the result. Looking at how one city could move on all levels at one time. What could be done to make buildings more efficient, to have an outreach campaign to citizens so we would turn off lights when we left the room. We would unplug appliances that would such up energy when they were not working. That we would use compact florescent bulbs that we would try to be more conscious about how we drove, maybe be more efficient in our driving patterns and so much else that we could do on a local personal level as well as a local level through municipal planning. And I am really convinced that we have to move on all these levels at one time. Yes, we cannot be successful if we don't have a president who believes in this mission. I believe in this mission. And I will start be reigniting our international involvement. We cannot sit here, in the united sates and expect to deal with global warming if we do not cooperate with other countries. Getting back into process, you know when president bush took us out of Kyoto, I regretted that but he had an opportunity to start his own process, he didn't want to do Kyoto, do something else. Reach out to India and China they have to be part of this. One of the flaws of the Kyoto process was I don't think people anticipated, even in the early 90s how quickly china and India would grow. China is now growing at 12 percent a year. They are the second highest user of energy but they are now the highest emitter of green house gases in the world. India is not far behind. We have got to get a new international process. The dispute about the science is thankfully over the IPCC finally put that rest last year. So, get that off the table. What is it that we are going to do? What kind of presidential leadership do we have internationally? And then building a coalition here at home to pass the energy legislation to the global warming legislation and lets not forget the environmental health piece of this. And that's the last thing I'm going to say. Every year I have been a senator I have introduced legislation to create an environmental health tracking system. There are really three triggers: genetics, behavior and environment and their interaction.; what we know is that the environment plays a big roll. You know, I represent places in New York City where w25, to 30 percent of the children have serious asthma. It just so happens they live in poor living conditions. They live where there are a lot of bus depots and Taxi depots where lost of cars are running a Spewing out emissions all the time and there is a connection, we know that. And I know, having worked for the last 6 years, on behalf of the victims of 911: firefighters, police officers and others who have been severely affected by what they breathed that day. How anyone could argue that what we breathe does not affect our health, after 911, is just impossible to understand. And we now have people who are dying because of their exposure on 911. So the debate should be over about environmental effects. Clean air is good for us on many levels. But it is especially good for our health; it is especially good for our children's health.

So, I am pleased to be here and excited about talking to you. These issues are critical to our country, our security, our environment, and our employment opportunities to create millions of new jobs. And the United States must lead the way and I will do that when I am elected President.

Sen. Clinton: Good morning! It is an absolute delight to be with you this morning for this very important conference. I want to thank Mark for the wonderful job that he is doing here at the Urban League, and for his strong leadership on so many issues. I also want to recognize and thank the entire Urban League board and the staff, who have put this together and have labored hard to make sure that it was a productive and important event, not just for the National Urban League, but for all of us.
I want to recognize St. Louis' mayor, Mayor Slay, delighted you're here for this important occasion. And other elected officials who are in the audience.

Now there are two people who are not here, who I would be remised if I did not mention. I would hear about it from one, and that is our old friend Vernon Jordan, who said, "You went all the way to St. Louis and you didn't event mention me."

So Vernon, wherever you are, we're thinking of you. And we're grateful to you for your lifetime of service.

Another who I want to honor by remembering him, is Ron Brown. Someone who served our country so well, and whom we miss. His brand of leadership and good humor in the face of challenge is always timely and we certainly could use more of it today.

And George, thank you for keeping the trains running on time.

And finally, I want to thank all of you for ninety-seven years of service. When I think of the National Urban League, I think of the people whom I've known, the projects that I've partnered on.

But according to a recent study by Dr. Silas Lee, who I'm very proud to say is one of my pollsters and given me great advice, and Dr. Bernard Anderson, who served as Assistant Secretary of Labor during my husband's Administration, according to their study between 2004 and 2006, the Urban League contributed more than $2.5 billion to America's economy. And not only that, in 2006, more than 70 million people were directly and indirectly served through the publications, the seminars, the advocacy and service projects undertaken by the Urban League.

That is an extraordinary achievement -- and it's one that's not often recognized. People don't realize that non-profits, like the Urban League, are drivers of economic progress. And I want to thank you, not only for the good work you do, but for the economic impact that work has.

I also want to really express my gratitude for this opportunity to continue the conversation that the Urban League is leading in our cities, and to fully endorse your Opportunity Compact -- it is a set of priorities which I strongly support built on 4 cornerstones that every American should be able to agree to. The opportunity to thrive, the opportunity to earn, the opportunity to own, and the opportunity to prosper -- that's a pretty good definition of the American dream in my book.

Because I don't have as much time as I would love for this conversation -- I could be up here for hours with all of you, and loving to hear back from you -- I want to focus on one aspect of this conversation -- and that is an issue highlighted in the Opportunity Compact, highlighted in your State of Black America report, and recently in the Dellums Commission. And that is the crisis of 1.4 million young men of color between the ages of 16 and 24 - they are out of school and out of work. That includes nearly one out of every three young African American men. Young men who are not earning legal wages or learning marketable skills. Over half growing up in homes without fathers, a third wind up in the criminal justice system, nearly 5,000 each year are claimed by guns or violence before their 25th birthdays.

Now I don't know about you, but I feel like I've been listening to this conversation all my life. And I firmly believe it is the wrong conversation, I reject it. I reject a conversation about 1.4 million young men as a threat, as a headache, or as a lost cause. I reject the conversation about 1.4 million disappointments, failures, and casualties of a broken system. That is not who these young men are.

I believe it is long past time for a new and different conversation. It is time for America to begin a conversation about 1.4 million future workers, entrepreneurs, tax-payers, community leaders, business executives. A conversation about 1.4 million future husbands and fathers and role models. A conversation about 1.4 million boys who have the God-given potential to grow into strong, proud, loving, decent, productive, accomplished men with our help and support. That is the conversation I want to have with you and America, and that is the conversation I want to take with me into the White House in January 2009. To put forth an agenda to finish the job.

It's time, America, for a change. And I have seen the potential. As a young lawyer right out of law school, I didn't want to go to Wall Street firms, I didn't want to clerk for a judge, all I wanted to do was to work for Marian Wright Edelman at the Children's Defense Fund.

That was my goal, I had met her, she had gone to Yale Law School about 10 years before me, she was legendary with her work in Mississippi on behalf of civil rights and the NAACP Legal Defense Fund. I heard she was speaking at Yale, I went to introduce myself to her during my very first year in law school. Heard her speak, was galvanized, went up to her and said, "I want to work for you." And she said, "Well, that's nice, but I can't pay you."

And I said, "Well, that's a problem because I'm working my way through law school, so I have to get paid." And she said, "If you can figure out how to get yourself paid, you can come work for me."

So applied for and I received a Law Student's Civil Rights Research Council Internship, which paid me to be able to go and do the work that has been the passion and calling of my life through my years of public service, and now my years in public office.

And I remember very well one of the first assignments that Marian gave me was to go to a couple of states and find out if we could stop them from jailing children with adults. And then to go door to door and ask people if they had children who weren't in school, because back in those days children were kept out of school for all kinds of reasons. Some of them had physical ailments, some of them had behavioral problems, some of them had to help support their families.

So I have been focused on what we need to do to help children succeed. And I have to tell you in all my 35 years as an advocate for children and families, I have never met a child without potential. And these 1.4 million young men are no different. And when we write them off and leave them behind -- when we squander their potential -- we squander America's potential. And that is nothing short of a moral crisis.

But let's be clear: this is not just a moral crisis -- it is an economic crisis. And it's not just an urban economic crisis. It is not just an African American economic crisis. It is an American economic and moral crisis.

And when we let these young boys and men fall through the cracks, we make a decision to spend $32 billion a year on prisons. Now we may not draw the connection all the time, but you and I know that's the decision we're making. We have decided that we're going to spend poorly, instead of spending it smartly.

Right now, across America, jobs are going empty because companies can't find trained, skilled employees to fill them.

So ultimately, the crisis of young men of color is a national crisis. And when I'm President, I will call for a national response -- and a national commitment -- to address it.

I will call everyone to the table. One of the that things I really believe in, is getting everybody out there together, and rolling up our sleeves, and starting to act like Americans again. We're the people who are supposed to be the problem solvers. We're not supposed to stand on the sidelines, wringing our hands talking about how terrible things are. We're supposed to be working together to solve problems.

And I want state and local governments, universities, businesses, unions, non-profits, churches, individuals. And I'm going ask one simple question: "What will you do -- not what you'll talk about -- but what will you do? Not another report, but what will you do in order to deal with this crisis?"

I am not going to accept half-steps or piecemeal measures as an answer. We need a smart, bold, daring, comprehensive approach. One based on the fundamental premise that these young men are all our children. All of our responsibility. Because after all these years, I still believe it takes a village to raise a child. So, that is why today, I am announcing my Youth Opportunity Agenda -- which goes hand in hand with the Opportunity Compact. This is my plan, as your President, to build that village.

An America where every child is valued for his or her God-given potential, and where all of us, from our families to our communities to our country, resolve to do whatever we can to help each child realize that potential.

Now, I believe the initiative has to start from day one -- the very day a child is born -- with early interventions to help that child get on the right path. That's why, as President, I'm going to focus like a laser on those early years. And it's not just focusing on the children; let's focus on the parents and the grand-parents, and the aunts and the uncles, and the brothers and the sisters.

We know what works; I've been doing this for 35 years. I started off at the Yale Child Studies Center, I've done it through Arkansas, and when I was privileged to work in the White House for my husband, and now in the Senate. We know what works.

Let's take these proven programs like nurse home visitation programs, where we send in qualified nurses and social workers and others to go in and help these young mothers and fathers understand what they need to do for their children.

Let's emphasize a program I helped to start during the 90's -- the Early Head Start program. Let's expand and build on Head Start -- a proven success.

And finally, I have made a commitment to universal pre-kindergarten for every four year old -- access to quality, affordable early learning when it really can make a difference in the lives of these children.

An astonishing fact, not from me because I believe this based on all the work I've done. But James Heckman, Noble Prize-winning economist from the University of Chicago, hardly thought to be a hotbed of fuzzy thinking and liberal thought, he did a study, and he concluded that if we had universal pre-kindergarten, we would close by 50% the achievement gap between white and black children. Just with that early investment, children will stay in school longer, they'll do better. Let's make that one of our priorities.

Second, once our children start school, we have to provide early mentoring and support to keep them on the path to success. It is not enough to give young men of color a chance to succeed, if then after they've started down this long and difficult path we step off of it. We need to be holding hands moving forward together.

We know that many young men drop out of school. Did you know that a child in America drops out of school every 29 seconds? Many don't make it through high school, some don't make it through junior high school. That's why, as President, I will expand programs like GEAR UP that intervene in middle school to provide mentoring and tutoring.

I want college visits to help young people understand this can be part of their future. Programs like the Hillside Work Scholarship Connection -- created with the help of the Rochester Urban League in Rochester, New York -- that develops individualized college and career success plans for middle school students and gives these students a job. Gives them a job after school, during vacations because they have to be exposed to the culture of work and learn all those habits and that discipline. And it has proven to be a great success. I also want to see schools like Eagle Academy in New York, in the Bronx.

I was honored to help start this Charter School with the one hundred black men in New York. I think David Banks, who was the principal, is here. We need a thousand of Eagle Academies for young men of color, where they feel accepted, supported, mentored and helped. I want to use a mentorship model that will reach an additional one million students.

My Administration will provide $100 million over five years to establish internship opportunities that will match students with businesses, with unions, with non-profits like the Urban League to provide the training they need to thrive in professional environments.

This isn't just a chance to enrich our children. It's not a corporate charity program. We have to give both sides of the equation -- the young men and the employer -- a chance to discover and develop each other, and to have then, an opportunity waiting for that young person.

The third part of my agenda involves building comprehensive, community-based programs to reach out to young people who are failing to thrive. Programs that don't just keep them from falling through the cracks -- but actually start filling in the cracks.

I'm going to ask our mayors and other local leaders to gather with representatives from across the community to develop such programs.

Now, that might mean creating one-stop youth centers like those in Baltimore and Los Angeles where case managers work to connect young people with tutoring, job training, and other support services. It might mean strengthening alternative education and Career Academies, apprenticeships and skills training.

I had a visit from the New York Auto Dealers a year or two ago. They said, "Senator, we have 600 jobs that we can't get filled for auto-mechanics. These are jobs in New York starting at $50,000. Where do we go to find such people?"

Well, to their credit, they started a school. But we need to have more partnerships like that. I'm talking about programs that give young people the skills and confident they need to compete for the high-tech 21ast century jobs, because one of the reasons those auto mechanic jobs are harder to fill is because you have to know about computers. It's no longer a low skill job; it's a high skill job with a very good salary.

Programs like Focus Hope in Detroit that train young people to fill the 16,000 machinist jobs opening up each year in that city. Programs like Year Up that give young people the skills to land good financial services jobs in downtown Providence, Rhode Island.

Programs that train students for new, renewable energy "green collar" jobs. YouthBuild, which have been putting our young people to work -- they're beginning to train young people to do this and I have a program that will create 50,000 jobs of people that can't be outsourced. If we're going to start getting serious about alternative energy and do things like solar, somebody's got to climb up there and put that solar panel on the roof. We're going to create millions of jobs if we do this right and a lot of them will be in the inner cities.

We also need to make sure our young people can get these jobs in the first place. Yes there are problems because of low education and low skills, lack of mentoring and networks. But let's be frank here. Some of those problems that stand in the way of young people and jobs is because of discrimination, plain and simple.

Which brings me to my fourth point. A recent study showed that when employers were presented -- I'm almost done, Mark. But you know I'm just fired up about this you can't stop me now. A recent study showed that when employers were presented with similarly qualified white and black applicants, they were twice as likely to hire the white applicants. They even hired white applicants with criminal records at the same or higher rates than black applicants.

So we're going to get back to a Justice Department and a Civil Rights Division that actually enforces the laws. And finally, we have got to tackle two remaining problems. First, how do we help these young men be responsible fathers? We've got to reverse President Bush's dramatic cuts in child support enforcement. We've got to make sure that every dollar goes to the children who need it.

We've got to make sure that the young men have the money to pay the child support which means raising the minimum wage again. And we have to confront the devastating impact of the criminal justice system. The brutal revolving door has already claimed so many young lives. And I want to have a second change program that really focuses on how we're going to keep our young people out of the criminal justice system, and how we're going to rehabilitate then and give them a new chance when they come out.

So, I know this is not going to be easy, but I am up for it if you are. I am confident and optimistic we can make this happen together. Now there will be all the naysayers who say, "Oh my goodness we can't do it. Politics is so hard." Well, we can't listen to them James Baldwin once said, "Those who say it can't be done are usually interrupted by those who are doing it."

And so we got to get about the business of doing it. Let me tell you that if we work together, if we elect a president who cares passionately about our young people, understands what it will take to make the Opportunity Compact real in their lives, we're going to see change in America. I want to be your partner. I look forward to working with you. Let's go out and make it happen.

Thank you all, and God bless you.

Thank you so much, Christie.
And it's not easy to come here and do this, for her and for her family. I am just very grateful that she would share her story. Of course, it's an abbreviated version of her story.

Her husband's job was outsourced. He actually trained his replacement. That's when they ran into all the problems that they faced with trying to pay the mortgage payments that kept going up.

And I don't know whether there is anybody in this audience or anyone who, through the media, who might be following this, who could do anything to help Christie and her family, but I hope somebody will try. Because it's really important to her and particularly her children. One of her children has a challenge in learning, and being in the school district has worked out really, really well. So I hope that somebody might be able to step forward who has a rental or who has some other way of helping Christie.

You know, the bank actually bought the home at higher than market value. So maybe if somebody with the bank or with someone associated with Ameriquest, which started this downward spiral, could step forth and try to, you know, show some humanity and compassion, that would be a good way to start what we need to do to repair some of the damage that is being done to families across our country.

You know, before I came out, I met with Michael Dillon and his fiancГ©e, Jenna Kresky, and their attorney, Walter Maroney, who also shared a story of deception, fraud, abuse -- just enough to make you wonder what's going on in our country.

And as Christie and I were talking before we came out, I was thinking how, in 1991 and '92, when Bill and I were here campaigning as he was running for president, we actually focused on the issue of home foreclosures. Some of you might remember.

We had an event in a home, just like the home that Christie shares with her husband and three children, because that home was being foreclosed on. And because of the economic conditions and some of the problems that people in New Hampshire were facing at that time, people were losing their homes.

Well, we all took a big sigh of relief during the 1990s, didn't we?

(LAUGHTER)

And we didn't face a lot of these economic problems that just cut right to the heart of the American dream for hard-working families like Christie's and like Michael and Jenna and others.

Well, here we are; we're back again. And it's a combination now of economic conditions that are not working for the vast majority of Americans and unsavory practices that are undermining the dream of homeownership.

So as much as I wish that Christie's story was the exception and that no one would ever have to go through what she and her family are going through, the reality is that they are, by no means, alone.

Their story is now the story of hundreds of thousands of families across America, including many right here in New Hampshire: families who have worked hard and done everything right, who maybe lose a job, maybe have a medical emergency or some other intervening event.

And they've spent years scrimping and saving to buy their home, they have signed exactly where the mortgage company told them to sign and submitted all the right papers. But then some kind of crisis intervenes, or, maybe because of some provision buried in the fine print, they discover that their mortgage rates are actually much higher than they thought. Maybe they realize too late they've been lured into buying a more expensive home than they could actually afford. Maybe they hit the end of a fixed-rate period and their rates double, but they can't pay off the principle without facing prepayment penalties.

And before they know it, their dream of homeownership has turned into a nightmare of escalating payments and threatening letters. And too many families end up in default, and too many lose their homes altogether.

This past June, there were nearly 165,000 foreclosures in America, 87 percent more than the previous June, in 2006. Here in New Hampshire, there were 1,400 foreclosures in just the first six months of this year, compared with 147 for all of 2006.

And, according to the New Hampshire banking commissioner, approximately 4,000 New Hampshire households with sub-prime mortgage loans -- that's 20 percent of all the sub-prime mortgages in the entire state -- will experience a jump in their monthly payments of between 50 and 100 percent. So a $1,500 mortgage becomes a $3,000 mortgage. And that's what we're looking forward to.

The problems we're seeing, however, are not limited to what's called the sub-prime market. They're not just affecting low-income families. Defaults and foreclosures are spreading, and they're hitting middle-income families like Christie's.

So what exactly is going on here? Well, I think several things.

Over the past few years, risky loans have been packaged and resold around the world, mortgage companies have collapsed, and the entire stock market is feeling the effects.

Those effects are spreading from Wall Street to Main Street. And Americans who have long counted on their homes as their biggest asset to carry them through retirement are seeing that sense of security be shredded.

Now, the Bush administration constantly reassures us that the economy is fine, that everything will be OK. Well, given their track record, that is not exactly comforting or believable.

Now, we know the mortgage problem is extremely complex. It has many, many roots. But one of the root causes is the trend in wages.

Wages have been stagnant. Housing prices, on the other hand, have been going, literally, through the roof. So we've had an affordability gap. Many families could not afford to buy homes with traditional mortgages.

So the mortgage companies came with a really seductive offer. They started offering more high-risk mortgages for people strapped for cash: products like interest-only and no-money-down mortgages. Unscrupulous brokers who get paid based on the size of the mortgages they sell lured many families into buying more expensive homes than they could actually afford. And many families were not told, were not counseled, were not warned, and did not understand the implications of signing on the dotted line.

At the same time household incomes have declined $1,300 over the past six years, costs have risen. Health-care costs are up 87 percent. College costs rose 40 percent. Gas prices have more than doubled.

So many people started borrowing against the equity in their homes to cover their expenses. Believe it or not, the amount of people's disposable incomes that comes from their home equity is double what it used to be.

Now, back when mortgage rates were lower and home prices were rising, if you got behind on your mortgage you could refinance your home or sell it, and you'd be just fine. As my friend Warren Buffet reminds us, a rolling loan gathers no loss.

(LAUGHTER)

He always has a way of saying things like that.

But then mortgage rates started to rise, so people could not afford to refinance anymore. Housing prices started to fall, so it got a lot harder to sell in many markets. Today we've got nearly a nine-month backlog of unsold homes. As a result, many families are finding themselves trapped: stuck with mortgages they can't pay and expenses they can't afford.

So they're facing wrenching choices: pay their medical bills or pay their mortgage; put off retirement or lose their homes. And many people who have worked hard their entire lives are receiving the same grim letter in the mail that Christie's family received.

Now, there are those who will tell you -- they tell me this -- "Well, that's just the way the market works, Hillary. Nothing we can do about it." Or they'll say, "Buyer beware. People just need to be more careful." Well, now, that's easy to say when it's not your home being taken away.

And I don't think unscrupulous mortgage brokers should be part of how our markets work. I don't think families should be lured into buying homes they can't afford so brokers and mortgage companies can make a bigger profit. I don't think people should have to be on the lookout for unfair clauses buried on page 700 of the fine print. And I don't think it's right that so many hard-working, responsible families across this country are losing their most precious possession and their most valuable asset.

So let's be clear: This isn't just a problem for families. What happens with mortgages can have a big effect on the economy. That's what we've been reading about in the newspapers over the past weeks. Auto companies have recently noted the weakness in the housing market is even affecting car sales.

And, as we've seen throughout American history, homeownership is not just about economy stability. It is also about economic growth.

Think about what happened after President Roosevelt signed the G.I. Bill, which helped returning soldiers obtain their mortgages. Families across America bought their first homes. A thriving middle class was born and flourishing. We had unprecedented economic expansion.

So today, we have a clear choice: We can look at the statistics, wring our hands, and continue to do nothing. Or we can do what America has done in times of difficulty: acknowledge that we have a real challenge and confront it head-on with real solutions.

Now, I think the choice is obvious. I think we need to act now with smart, practical solutions to strengthening our housing and mortgage markets. We need to put an end to fly-by-night mortgage brokers peddling loans to unqualified applicants based on inflated appraisals. We need to help those facing the pain of foreclosure. And we need to secure the marketplace and put reform in action right now.

Now, back in March, I announced an agenda to address abuses in the sub-prime lending market, because back in March, that's all anybody thought was going to be at stake. People said, "Well, maybe there are problems in the sub-prime market, but, you know, that's not really going to be that significant."

Well, I disagreed then, and I disagree now. I think the sub- prime market was sort of like the canary in the mine. You know, it was telling us loudly and clearly, "There are problems here." And now the problems have unfortunately spread to the conventional mortgage market as well. In fact, some of the very same tricks of the trade are being used to hurt people in the conventional market that have been long used against people in the sub-prime market.

So that's why today I'm announcing a four-part plan for how I, as president, would address abuses across the mortgage industry -- a plan to curb unfair lending practices and hold brokers and lenders accountable, give families the support they need to avoid foreclosure, and increase the supply of affordable housing.

I'll be introducing this plan as legislation when the Senate goes back into session after Labor Day. We're going to try, in the Democratic Congress, to push forward on this agenda.

But if the president won't sign our proposals that we will send to him in the next months, when I'm president I will take a very active role in making this a priority, and I will sign into law provisions to do exactly what I'm outlining.

The way I see it, one of the most...

(APPLAUSE)

You know, the way I see it, one of the most important jobs of the next president is to restore a sense of economic leadership to our country and a sense of fairness to our economy.

I believe in shared responsibility and shared prosperity. I see myself as a modern progressive. I believe one of the crowning achievements of the early American progressives was reforming our economic system, making changes that made the economy work for more Americans.

That is why lending reform is so important, because abuses in this area affect those who can least afford to lose their homes. And in today's world of loan repackaging, these failures can and will have ripple effects throughout the entire economy.

So it's precisely in areas like mortgage lending, where we see this gathering storm, that we have to act quickly and responsibly to reform the system.

And that's where I fundamentally differ with Republicans. They believe in letting everyone fend for him- or herself. They believe in what the president calls an ownership society, which is really, "You're on your own." It's the yo-yo economy: Some go up, and some go down, and the strings are pulled by other people.

Well, I don't think that is the way America works best. I think when we see a problem; we need to roll up our sleeves and get together to fix it.

And that is the kind of president that I intend to be: reaching toward big goals like universal health care, ending the war in Iraq, but also making...

(APPLAUSE)

... also making the economy work for everyone again.

You know, that's why, when I was listening to Christie and thinking about where we were in '91 and '92, where the economy was flat on its back, where people were being so left out and at their wits' end, and yet it took a lot of effort and it was politically difficult -- because I'll tell you something: Change is not just a word, it is a challenge.

And to get the changes we need in America, we're all going to have to get together and stand up to those who have a lot to gain from keeping our system the way it is. And it's the mortgage industry, and it's all the people they sell loans to, and it's the people who package them, and it's the people who make money off of them.

So let me tell you what I would do.

First, I would focus on cracking down on unscrupulous brokers who lure unsuspecting families into unfair mortgages.

Many families assume their broker has their best interests at heart. But that is often not the case. What they don't realize is that the more expensive the mortgage a broker sells, the more money the broker makes. So brokers have a strong incentive to steer their clients toward the biggest, most expensive mortgages, even if clients can't afford them.

We need to help families go into home buying with their eyes wide open. So I'm proposing, as a matter of federal law, we require brokers to tell families up front they're paid on the basis of the size of the mortgage they sell. That will put buyers on notice that they need to ask tough questions...

(APPLAUSE)

... and be wary of the products that are being offered.

We also need to do more to screen mortgage brokers to ensure they're qualified and that they deal fairly with clients.

You know, I had a roundtable event about this down in Orlando, Florida, a couple of months ago. And a former broker from Ameriquest said he could not sleep at night any longer. He quit his job, and he came in and he spilled the beans. And he sat there and he talked about all the tricks and all the pressure that are put on the brokers to make them go out and sell these loan packages that are going to explode in the face of the borrowers.

So we've got to do more to really make sure that we have national standards for brokers. Many states don't even have basic licensing standards. In a lot of states, you don't even have to be licensed to be a mortgage broker. So the average homebuyer has no reliable way to know whether a broker is trustworthy or not.

And that's why I'm proposing that the federal government work with the states to develop strong, meaningful broker licensing standards to stream brokers and govern their conduct.

I will also require...

(APPLAUSE)

... that brokers register with the federal government. That way, we can establish a single database to track rules violations, complaints and employment history.

(APPLAUSE)

So before you hire a broker, you can get online and do your own background check to ensure you're dealing with someone who will deal with you fairly.

This is especially important in the home equity refinancing area, because a lot of that business is sold over the phone. People get a call. I'll tell you something, some of the brokers don't even use their real names on the phone. And so, people are listening, and it sounds really good. And they particularly prey on the elderly.

So we've got to have more standards governing brokers.

Second, I will also crack down on the mortgage lenders by eliminating prepayment penalties and working to ensure...

(APPLAUSE)

... that lenders don't lure people into unworkable mortgages in the first place.

Now, as some of you know from unfortunate personal experience, prepayment penalties are a gold mine for mortgage lenders and it's a trap for homebuyers.

The way many high-risk, non-traditional mortgages work is that you pay a low rate for a number of years -- which is probably why you took the mortgage in the first place -- then, once that time period is up, the rates skyrocketed. Then you are faced with this increasing rate.

Now, what many people didn't know and what seems to me to be so perverse is that, when you first get that new notice that your rate has doubled -- which is going to happen to a lot of people in New Hampshire in the next year, because of the mortgages they already have -- a lot of people say, "Oh, my goodness, let's try to start paying down the mortgage as fast as we can." I mean, that's kind of part of the American ethos, you know, pay down the mortgage, get out of debt. What people don't realize is that if you try to pay your mortgage early while you still have the low rate, the lender slaps a huge prepayment penalty on you.

So lenders are actually discouraging people from being responsible and paying off their mortgages early, because they want to increase their profits. So it's not surprising that loans with prepayment penalties have a 52 percent greater risk of default than those without.

That's bad for families, and it's bad for the housing market, which is why I propose prohibiting all prepayment penalties on all mortgages. I think we should encourage people to pay off their mortgages early.

(APPLAUSE)

You know, I'm old enough to remember, you know, mortgage-burning parties, where somebody in the neighborhood would pay off their mortgage; they owned their home free and clear. And all the neighbors would get together, and they'd burn the mortgage documents. That was like a, you know, a great celebration. Well, we're not letting people do that. So we're going to change the way mortgage lenders operate.

We also need to do more to stop lenders from trapping people in unworkable mortgages in the first place.

Right now, lenders have a lot of discretion when deciding whether someone qualifies for a mortgage. In making this assessment, many lenders don't take into account whether a family will be able to pay property taxes and property insurance.

And too many families, especially first-time homebuyers, don't know to budget for these expenses. But once they're locked into the mortgage and tax time rolls around, they experience payment shock and suddenly realize they may be in over their heads.

That's why I propose requiring lenders to take into account their borrowers' ability to pay property taxes and insurance fees when deciding whether to make that loan in the first place. The requirement would apply to all high-risk mortgage products.

These costs for property taxes, insurance, you know are a huge part of what you have to be able to put aside to pay for when you own a home. And lenders say, "Well, that shouldn't be our responsibility," but I think it is, because if they go after first- time homebuyers, they ought to be willing and we'll require them to be more helpful.

Now, I've been talking about how to keep people from getting trapped in unaffordable mortgages in the first place, and that's critical. But we also have to do more to help people stay on track and avoid foreclosure once they have their mortgages. And that's the third part of my plan.

Back in March, when I spoke about sub-prime mortgages, I called for a foreclosure timeout. And we can't, you know, make that happen yet, because we don't have any legal tools certainly, but we certainly can talk about it, and we can try to persuade the Fed and others to encourage the lenders to think more creatively about how to have a foreclosure timeout: helping people refinance loans, helping people pay a lower rate for longer, doing things that will avoid this cascade of home losses.

I propose we expand the role also played by Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, the government-chartered and -backed institutions that do so much with homeownership. They should have to help at-risk homeowners avoid foreclosure. They are supported by the federal government. That is a public service that they should be required to perform.

They do an excellent...

(APPLAUSE)

They do an excellent job in helping to provide reasonably priced mortgages for Americans, and they have a lot of foreclosure prevention programs. But we have to expand them, because the numbers of people facing foreclosures are going up exponentially.

And I think we should also have a billion-dollar fund in the federal government to support state programs that help at-risk borrowers avoid foreclosure.

Now, several states, including New York, have included rescue funds to assist people who are on the brink of foreclosure, people who have often nowhere else to turn and are terrified of losing everything they have.

Such a program could help Christie's family. You know, her husband did get a new job, paying in the six figures. He will be back on his feet, after having had his job outsourced. If somebody would take the time to sit down and help them and maybe talk to the bank, they will be able to get back into paying for the mortgage on their home. So we need people who are playing that role.

Now, this is not easy to implement. Chicago actually tried to have face-to-face counseling and support for people, both before they bought and during the homeownership period. And there was a massive outcry by the lenders and the brokers.

So, again, this sounds so common-sensical, but we have to, you know, get together and work to get it passed in order to make it happen, or get Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae to also step up and do this on their own, maybe with some prodding by the Federal Reserve.

Fourth and finally, we need to make a national commitment to creating more reasonably priced housing options, so people don't have to resort to risky or unworkable mortgages in the first place.

You know, really, the mortgage issue is partially an affordable- housing issue. Even with recent declines, real estate prices are still quite high, and families are committing more and more of their incomes to mortgage payments.

Between 2001 and 2004, the number of households devoting more than half of their incomes to housing increased by 1.9 million. Think about that: half of more of your income going to support your housing. Some families forgo basic necessities to pay mortgages. Others just forgo homeownership in the first place or turn to risky mortgages.

I think we should have another $1 billion committed by the federal government over five years to help state, county and municipal governments build and rehabilitate affordable housing across America.

Now, that, in and of itself, would not...

(APPLAUSE)

... you know, would not do it, but it would incentivize others to do it.

We have an affordable-housing crisis. And it is all over the country. It started in high-cost areas, but now it is spreading. We don't have enough affordable rental units, and we don't have enough affordable homes.

There are some good examples across America. There are already, in many states and localities, trust funds in place to help people get into affordable housing.

And guess what? That also creates new jobs.

So it really is a win-win. And it's time the federal government supported these state and local housing trust funds.

We also need to look more generally at infrastructure. And I'll be back in New Hampshire tomorrow to talk about what we need to do concerning infrastructure. Because, of course, with the collapse of the bridge in Minneapolis, now everybody's talking about it.

You know, some of us have been talking about it a long time. Our bridges, our tunnels, our roads, our mass transit, our ports, our airports are woefully underinvested in as a nation.

(APPLAUSE)

And we just have to get serious again, as Americans, that we want to remain the leader in the world. We want to have our children, like these beautiful children here, feeling that, when they grow up, America will be there for them, just as America was there for us; that there will be opportunities to work and to raise a family and to have a home.

And, you know, we want to continue to be the strongest, safest, smartest, richest country in the world, don't we? Well, you've got to make investments in order to make that happen.

(APPLAUSE)

You know, together, my proposals and others that people are putting forth can help curb the abuses that have contributed to the problems we face today. And we can assist people facing foreclosures, we can create more affordable housing and protect the American dream of homeownership.

Because we know that's about more than financial security. It is about laying roots deep in a community. It's about knowing who your neighbors are. It's about knowing where your kids go to school. It's about having that sense of belonging and community. And that's what I believe in.

You know, my late father, who was in the Navy for five years, and when he came out he wanted to start a small business and start a family. And so, he -- you know, we lived in an apartment when I was born, but for him and my mother it was all about having a home.

So he paid for a brick home that, you know, when I was little looked like a castle. When I see it today, it's not as big as I remember it, but it was certainly big enough for my parents and my bothers and me.

And back in 1975, Bill and I were living in Arkansas and teaching at the law school. And as I've written about in my autobiography, I was trying to decide whether or not to get married. And it was, you know, one day "yes," one day "maybe," back and forth. And one day, we drove by a little red brick house with a for-sale sign in front of it. And I casually remarked, "That was a really sweet-looking house." That is literally all I said.

Then I went away for a few weeks and came back to start teaching again at the university law school, and Bill picked me up at the airport, and he said, "Do you remember that house that you liked?" I couldn't remember. And he said, "Well, I bought it."

(LAUGHTER)

So he said, "Now we have to get married."

(LAUGHTER)

(APPLAUSE)

So actually we did, in the house.

(APPLAUSE)

And it's hard to believe it cost $21,000. And, you know, we thought, again, it was just the most wonderful house. You know, the kitchen needed a lot of work, and it was, you know, a little bit funky in many ways. But nevertheless, we were married in our living room, surrounded by our closest friends and family.

And that home meant the world to us. It was where we started our life together. It's where we did celebrate, as Christie said, birthdays and holidays and where we hosted our family and friends.

Every family should have that same opportunity. That is what America stands for. And...

(APPLAUSE)

... I hope that I can earn your vote to become the president who will once again stand up for an economy that works for everyone and stand up for homeownership.

And let me end where I started. If you have any ideas about how to help Christie and her family, I hope you will.

You know, it's heartbreaking to me that our system operates so well for so many in so many different ways. We have the greatest economy in the world. It's dynamic, it's complex. But it's not working the way it needs to right now for too many.

And therefore, we've got to figure out how we're going to help each other until we finally once again have a president who doesn't think his only job is helping those who are already rich get even richer.

(APPLAUSE)

Thank you all very much.

I'm honored to have the keychain вЂ“ actually the keychain is pretty useful. I will be a proud user of that. And I'm very grateful to the Mayor and I appreciated his comments because I think what he said really set the stage for what I want to talk to you about this morning. It is a problem that has literally affected our entire country
Of course we were watching the news this past week with a heavy heart at the sight of that broken bridge and those submerged cars and the grieving families and the heroic rescue and recovery efforts that are still ongoing. And I know that our thoughts and prayers are with everyone who was touched by this terrible accident.

There may be nothing that we individually can do to try ease the pain and the difficulties that the bridge collapsing has caused the people of the Twin Cities area, but there is a great deal we can do as a nation to ensure that accidents like that don't happen in New Hampshire and across America.

This is a real wake up call. And over the last two years the Mississippi River, that great river that goes down the middle of our country, first at its mouth, has reminded us of the importance of infrastructure with the collapse of the levies during Katrina, and now at the near beginnings of the river, we've been reminded once again вЂ“ we face an infrastructure crisis.

I've been talking about and worrying about and working on infrastructure as a Senator from New York for the past six and half years. It's not a subject that usually gets headlines. People know we have problems, but there's always something that seems more pressing for us to deal with. And as the Mayor was so rightly saying, there are problems right here in Rochester, there are problems throughout the state like there are in every other state. But unless it's a crisis, we don't really pay attention.

Well my point today is вЂ“ it is a crisis. It's a silent crisis. It's a crisis with the potential of not only death and injury, property loss and other kinds of dangers and inconveniences, but it is imperative that we address this crisis for our economy and for the kind country we want to be in the 21st Century.

Every day, millions of Americans inch their way through bumper-to-bumper traffic. They drive over structurally deficient bridges. Millions board buses and subways which the federal Department of Transportation has deemed poor, substandard, or merely adequate. We get water from aging water pipes вЂ“ some of the pipes in New York are over 100 years old, and because of the leaks the inevitably come from corrosion and other problems, they waste a billion, a billion and more gallons of water each month. They potentially expose our water вЂ“ and I have to say New York City is consistently ranked among the very best in public water, so New York City does a great job. But any water system that has been there a long time, or hasn't been maintained, has the potential of exposing us to chemicals and toxins.

And every single hour, our goods are shipped on under-serviced, overburdened railways. We've had a rash of railway accidents in New York that I have followed very closely and worked both with the state and with the railroad companies to try and remedy. But derailments are becoming more and more common. Goods travel through unprotected, overcrowded seaports or through waterways filled with broken locks.

And we know all too well that the results can be tragic. Not only bridge collapse in Minneapolis and the levies collapse in New Orleans, but the collapse of the Big Dig tunnel ceiling, and the highway overpass that collapsed last week in California. This is a wake up call that is screaming. It's like when you have an alarm clock and it gets increasingly louder because we don't want to hear it or we hit it because we want to get a few more minutes of sleep. Well we've been asleep. And certainly what happened with Katrina вЂ“ which was a natural disaster that turned into a national disgrace and became international embarrassment and cost nearly 1,700 of our fellow citizens their lives, was the loudest of all wake up all calls.

And keep in mind, the bridge in Minnesota, that the Mayor use to live near, was one of nearly 600,000 bridges across America -- more than 60,000 of those bridges are in need of serious repair.

Something is very wrong when, at the dawn of the twenty-first century, in the richest country on earth, people are actually nervous about driving over bridges for fear that they might collapse. Or they're worried that their levees might burst, or their highways might buckle.

And the degradation of our infrastructure isn't just a serious threat to our families' safety вЂ“ it is a threat to our homeland security as well. More than five years after 9/11, we still have not secured our borders, our railways, our mass transit systems, our ports, our chemical plants, our nuclear facilities and more.

And in addition, if we needed even more arguments about why we should act, in addition to threatening our safety and our homeland security вЂ“ the problems with our infrastructure are also a grave threat to our economy.

Did you know that those hours we spend sitting in traffic cost as much as $170 billion a year in wasted time, fuel, productivity and damage to our environment? Those railroads carry half of all freight not carried by air. Those waterways carry roughly one-sixth of our inter-city freight. And those seaports are our gateway to international trade. When there are shutdowns or delays or a lack of capacity, America's businesses and workers pay the price.

We don't always think about this, but I was listening to an NPR report about the consequences of the collapse in Minneapolis and there was a man who owned a trucking firm and he said the price of everything is going to rise. Because we're going to spend more on fuel, because we have to take detours, and they began to talk about things we don't think about as consequences to the cost of the living and to the economy.

In short, we're trying to run today's economy on yesterday's infrastructure вЂ“ and we're jeopardizing tomorrow's prosperity. It's like trying to run a company today with typewriters, or mimeograph machines or rotary phones. If you're lucky, you might break even вЂ“ but you sure don't expect to break much of a profit.

The American Society of Civil Engineers gives our dams a D, our power grid a D, our drinking water systems a D-, our roads a D. I have to ask, do you really think America is really a country that is satisfied with Ds on our report card when it comes to infrastructure?

That's not the country I us grew up in, that's not the country I was raised to believe in and it's certainly not the country we want for our children. Here in America, we've never been content to sit back and make do with what worked for our parents and grandparents and our great-grandparents.

When we've caught a glimpse of a new frontier вЂ“ we've built the infrastructure to reach it. When we've discovered new opportunities вЂ“ we've built the infrastructure to seize them.

In America, our infrastructure has always been the engine of our aspirations. Think back to the early 1800s. I just visited the Portsmouth Naval Shipyard. It was started in 1800 as many of you know. Think about the audacity of this new country deciding they were going to build this shipyard. And they kept at it now for 207 years.

Think about early 1800s in New York, when the Governor of New York вЂ“ who happened to be named Clinton вЂ“ I like that too вЂ“ persuaded the state legislature to construct a 363 mile canal connecting New York City to the West. Now you can imagine that we had a lot of naysayers in the 1800s just like we do today вЂ“ why are we building it, it costs too much money, it'll never work. If fact, the naysayers deemed the project "Clinton's ditch." But here is what Governor Clinton said, "The city will, in the course of time, become the granary of the world, the emporium of commerce, the seat of manufactures, the focus of great moneyed operations." And he was right. Fifteen years later, the Erie Canal had made New York City America's busiest port.

Think about President Lincoln, who decided to build the transcontinental railroad in the midst of the Civil War. While he struggled to hold North and South together, he has the vision to lay the groundwork to connect East and West. The completion of the railroad reduced coast-to-coast travel time from months to just a week вЂ“ and settlers flocked to the new frontier.

Or think about President Eisenhower and his belief that, "Our unity as a nation is sustained by free communication of thought and by easy transportation of people and goods." Today, we're still reaping the economic benefits of the interstate highway system he championed.

Now, these leaders and so many others understood that expanding our infrastructure was the key to expanding our economy. They knew we could start all the companies, and manufacture all the products, and grow all the food we wanted вЂ“ but if we couldn't get the goods to the customers вЂ“ if we couldn't get the workers to the jobs вЂ“ the economy would never flourish. And today, that same understanding extends to everything we need to do in both our physical infrastructure and our virtual infrastructure, like expanding broadband the critical worldwide infrastructure of the modern global economy.

Now, we also know that investing in infrastructure creates jobs. The estimates are pretty reliable. For every $1 billion spent on fixing crumbling infrastructure creates nearly 48,000 jobs.

But instead of investing in the infrastructure of the future and growing our economy, we continue to make do. We patch and repair. We ignore the advice of our engineers, economists, businesses, unions, community leaders. We try to build our children's future with our grandparents' infrastructure. And we are falling further and further behind.

We don't need any more warnings. We don't need any more wakeup calls. It is time to stop wringing our hands вЂ“ and start rolling up our sleeves and rebuild America.

It's time to stop asking how we can afford to fix our infrastructure вЂ“ and start asking how we can afford not to. It's time to ask ourselves, what if we could shave minutes вЂ“ even hours вЂ“ off our commutes? What if we could shave hours вЂ“ even days вЂ“ off our shipping times? What if our ports could send and receive tons of additional goods each week, safely? What if we had public transit system and a rail system that dramatically reduced our reliance on foreign oil, and our carbon dioxide emissions, and our smog and air pollution?

Well, I'm here today because I believe we can do all of these things. I consider myself a modern American progressive. And in the spirit of those early progressives вЂ“ who were Republicans as well as Democrats, who I think put country before party, who made commitments to bring us together and work side by side вЂ“ I think we can do this. And that's why I have been working as a Senator and why I think it's imperative to make this a priority for my presidency.

You know I've co-sponsored, on a bipartisan, the National Infrastructure Improvement Act of 2006 with my colleague, Senator Voinovich from Ohio. This Act, because we couldn't get the kind of program we wanted, we set up a commission to ensure we got the data that would provide the basis for Congress asking, with a new president who actually cared about our infrastructure. We want to know, can our infrastructure sustain economic growth for the twenty-first century? We don't think so. How do we get adequate funding? Obviously that's big unanswered question. How do we develop comprehensive recommendations вЂ“ that instead of divvying up the money on political pork barrel spending, we do it on the basis of a real plan for America. This legislation has passed the Senate, I'm hopeful that it will pass the House and I'm hopeful the President will sign it because that will give me the basis for what I want to do as president.

I want to set big goals as your president. Big goals, like universal health care, quality, affordable healthcare. I want to set a triple goal of moving us toward energy security and independence, dealing with global warming, and creating lots of jobs from dealing with energy and global warming. I want to end the Iraq war and bring that money home. And in addition to all the other goals on education, and stem cell research and reforming our government, I want to make modernizing our nation's infrastructure, as the backbone of our prosperity, one of my goals as well.

You know, every generation faces tough challenges and they require tough choices. We talk about the Greatest Generation of my father, my late father, because they survived the Depression, they fought and kept our country going during World War II, and they deserve our thanks. But at the very same time they were making commitments to a country that they believed in. And we have to ask ourselves, what commitments have we made? What have we done to sacrifice and share a burden that I think should be the responsibility of each American generation?

The reality is that with what we've seen in Minneapolis and New Orleans it's hard to answer that question. That is why I'm going to challenge us, our generation and all of American, to stand up and fix our country - to rebuild the failing infrastructure of the 20th century while we build the new digital and energy infrastructure of the 21st century.

It's going to take serious resources and a serious national commitment. It's going to take a national partnership among all levels of government and between the public and the private sector.

It requires a smart, comprehensive plan. And it requires that we deal not only with repairing and expanding our infrastructure, but solving the problems that are created by infrastructure вЂ“ you know, congestion, urban sprawl, environmental degradation.

And that is what I want to talk with you about. My Rebuild America Plan вЂ“ which will create millions of good new jobs, elevate our standard of living, and enhance our ability to compete in the world marketplace.

I start with three emergency initiatives to help states and localities immediately review and repair critical infrastructure.

And we've got to have the federal government at the table. I think we should provide $250 million in "Emergency Assessment Grants" so that state cans pull together the information that is there, conduct any new assessments and inspections that they need to and give grants to prioritize what things they have to do and in what order. You know if everything's a priority, nothing gets done. If you set priorities, you can begin to assess them right away.

At the same time, I'll invest $10 billion over ten years in an "Emergency Repair Fund" to begin addressing the extensive backlog of emergency infrastructure repairs. Right now, 13% of our bridges are "functionally obsolete" -- meaning that they don't meet current transportation standards, they could go any time. Another 12% are "structurally deficient" вЂ“ including that bridge in Minnesota вЂ“ meaning they're deteriorating and losing the capacity to sustain their loads. Right here in New Hampshire, 446 of the 3,699 non-covered state and local bridges are on the "red list." That means they're bridges of greatest concern. That includes the Memorial Bridge, which I just saw for myself today.

In addition, today, nearly half the locks on our waterways are obsolete вЂ“ that's a figure that if we do nothing could rise to 80% within the next 15 years.

It's time that the federal commitment stepped up and addressed these deficiencies. Now, states are already spending money on these projects. The federal government is also, but together, we're not spending enough. My fund will supplement what they're already doing. We know states, as the Mayor alluded to, sometimes put off even starting certain repairs because they don't know where the money will come from to finish the repairs.

One of the problems with the federal government is that we don't have a capital budget. That means we don't budget smartly for long-term capital projects. If you're going to fix the levees in New Orleans you've got know that's going to take a couple of years. If you're going to fix a lot of our infrastructure that's an investment you don't get done in one year but the way that our federal budget runs, we budget every year. And that is just a really foolish way if you're talking about getting the biggest return on your dollar. That's something that I will raise with the Congress. We've tried it before. They aren't likely to respond very favorably because every year they get to make these decisions but we need a capital budget. That would help us set priorities for some very big projects and then see them through. I also believe it would save us money. Because if we could actually plan for three to five years, we would have a much better way of controlling costs. So I hope that we'll consider that.

But, my Emergency Repair Fund will give states the predictability to get certain projects underway and then we can allocate over time and people shouldn't have to worry about that.

We also need to upgrade the standards. That's why National Academy of Engineering and the National Institute of Standards and Technology will be the institutions I ask to give me answers to two critical questions.

One: I want them to review the safety certification process and standards currently in place. Those standards may not be rigorous enough for heavy trucks or for increased traffic. You know when some of these bridges were built in the 1960s the projections for traffic and weight on them didn't take into account what are now doing, 40 or 50 years later.

Two: We've got to set that priority list. And I want an independent group to do that. My second point in my plan to rebuild America involves investing an additional $1 billion in our intercity passenger rail system, which carries 23 million passengers a year, links more than 500 communities, connects communities with airports, city bus systems, providing additional convenience for passengers. And with gas price very unpredictable and traffic worse than ever, airline travel riddled with overbooking, overcrowding and delays вЂ“ train travel is actually becoming increasingly appealing.

But there's very little federal funding for these rail systems. They treat them as primarily a state responsibility and I think that's the wrong approach. Train travel protects our environment. It reduces our dependence on foreign oil and helps alleviate congestion. One of the reasons that some of the Asian countries and some of the European countries are really make progress against us economically is that they have heavy investments in trains. And those trains are high-speed trains. They move quickly both people and goods and this should be a national priority.

Third, I think we also need to more to build up our intra-city transportation systems вЂ“ the subways and buses that comprise our public transit systems.

In 2006, Americans took more than 10 billion trips on local public transportation. And those systems serve as a lifeline for so many low and middle-income Americans and for many senior citizens who are no longer able to drive.

Public transportation is also one of the best strategies for protecting the environment. Believe it or not, emissions from road vehicles accounted for more than 50% of air pollution in America. If we just increased our public transportation from 5% to 10%, we'd reduce our reliance on foreign oil by roughly 40%, reduce carbon dioxide emissions by 25%, and reduce smog-causing nitrogen oxide emissions by about one third.

But despite the benefits of public transit, today, 84% of public transit spending goes toward maintaining existing capacity вЂ“ only just 16% toward expanding our systems. I want to change that ratio. So I want to increase federal funding for public transit by $1.5 billion a year.

I want to get those funds to communities committed to using them effectively вЂ“ communities committed to avoiding sprawl by locating homes, jobs and stores nearby, reducing the need for unnecessary car trips. Over the next 25 years, many of the buildings in which we live, work, and shop will be built or rebuilt. So today, we have a unique opportunity to encourage sustainable development.

Fourth, I want to work with state and local governments and the private sector to create a national policy to modernize our seaports. You know this is something sort of out of sight of mind. If you're not in a coastal state like New Hampshire or New York, you don't think about seaports as much as we should. Twenty six percent of our Gross Domestic Product вЂ“ and a growing share goes through our seaports.

1980, United States ports handled just 8 million containers вЂ“ by 2006, it was up to 40 million. By 2020 we expect it to be 120 million. The ports simply are just not keeping up. Many are running out of space. They are plagued by navigation channels that are too narrow, or harbors that are too shallow to accommodate larger ships. They don't have modern technology including, homeland security technology, yet there is not one, single federal agency responsible for our ports. So while ports are of national economic significance, responsibility for port funding has fallen primarily to state and local governments.

That's why, we need to bring out ports into the 21st Century and work with our state and local governments, but have the federal government provide support to upgrade technology, expand capacity and reduce congestion.

Fifth, I will want to make it a national priority to confront the growing national problem of congestion. You know, right now, traffic has pretty much taken its place alongside death and taxes as one of those things you just can't avoid.

And between 1993 and 2003, the amount of time Americans spent in traffic delays increased more than 50% вЂ“ and gallons of fuel wasted increased nearly 80%. If current trends continue, by 2013, moderately dense areas will experience the same kind of traffic problems we see in gridlock in New York City or Chicago or LA.

And the rise of communities that are further and further away means longer commutes. And when you think about wit the Internet we need to be figuring out how to promote more telecommuting. I think we should of course increase what we do to be smart about congestion, but why can't we be smart about giving more people the opportunity to work from home? Especially mothers who are balancing family and work вЂ“ because right now we have good evidence that it's actually good for productivity but there's a reluctance to do it. That's true in government, that's true in the private sector and I think we need to support initiatives that promote telecommuting. Maybe not five days a week, maybe three days a week but anything we can do to try to limit the traffic congestion actually increases productivity and helps our environment.

I think that when we look at technology we don't realize that today we can collect real-time information on road and travel conditions and we can actually detect traffic density and adjust their traffic signals and post the information on electronic road signs to warn drivers of congestion ahead.

We can have more efficient electronic toll systems, and make sure that we have a good camera system high-traffic areas to monitor accidents and speed the deployment of ambulances and tow trucks.

San Diego even has reversible toll lanes, so when traffic is much heavier in one direction than another, they can reverse a lane and ease the congestion. So let's use technology as our friend to get us out of these traffic jams that so many of us experience.

And sixth, we need to make a serious commitment to modernizing our electric power system. The average power generating station in our country was built in the 1960s. Today, interruptions вЂ“ some of which are big enough that they really shut everything done, some of which are just sporadic and happen in certain areas вЂ“ but interruption in our supply of electricity cost us roughly $150 billion a year. And yet, the electric industry devotes fewer dollars to research and development than the dog food industry.

We had a brown out in Queens. No body could figure what had happened. And it really interfered with a lot of people who lived in apartments with no operating elevator once the electricity went out. It really put a great burden on a lot of elderly people. A lot of small businesses lost refrigeration вЂ“ floral shops, ice cream shops. And I went to visit some of my constituents to figure out what we were going to do about it and I was standing outside of a little restaurant that has lost thousands of dollars worth of food because of the shut down, and a gentleman came up to me and introduced himself. And he said to me, Senator, I am from India. I never thought I would move to the United States and see electricity disruptions. And it really struck me. Because we think of ourselves of being so far advanced of any other country, and yet we're not keeping that advantage.

I think we can do better. That's why I sponsored the Electric Reliability Act which has been signed into law, helping to give our federal government more authority to make our electricity system more reliable. This is a disaster waiting to happen. We've got an outdated grid. An outdated transmission and distribution system. Nobody is responsible for investing in it and it is the lifeblood of how we power our economy.

Seventh, we need to dramatically increase our investments in broadband deployment. Back in 2001, America was fourth in the world in broadband access. Today, we're 25th. Other countries are investing heavily in broadband to connect up their entire country.

And I've have seen the power of broadband firsthand. In New York, we started a program where we brought together leaders from the business, non-profit, university, banking, and computer technology communities вЂ“ including E-Bay -- to give local businesses the capital and technical assistance they needed to expand onto the Internet. I did this because, any of you who have been up in the Adirondacks up in northern New York know how beautiful it is, but we have a lot people who can't make a very good living because they don't have big market for their goods. And so we worked to put them on E-Bay and we proved that we could take somebody who was making fishing rods in northern New York, or making soap, and give them a global market place.

Now, I believe in markets вЂ“ 100%. Markets are one of the great advantages we have for making our economy dynamic. But when the market isn't working вЂ“ when the companies are not wiring certain areas вЂ“ either underserved urban areas or underserved rural areas - then the federal government has to step in with planning grants, and equipment grants, and tax incentives. That's what we had here with electricity. Utilities didn't think it was possible to extend electricity to certain parts of our country. And so the federal government had to step in. And I think if we focus on expanding broadband and I've recently called for an innovation agenda to support state and local communities to expand and develop broadband, then we know we can make progress because information highways are to the 21st what canals and railroads were to the 19th century and interstate highways in the 20th.

Eighth, and finally, we don't just need to build the broadband and electrical infrastructure of the 21st century вЂ“ we need to build the clean energy infrastructure as well. That's why I've proposed creating a "Green Buildings Fund" вЂ“ a $1 billion investment in grants and low interest loans to states to improve energy efficiency in buildings. It'll help us cut pollution, combat climate change, and create thousands of jobs вЂ“ what we can call "green collar jobs." I've sponsored legislation with my colleague, Senator Sanders of Vermont, because we want to train people to do these jobs.

Investing in energy efficient infrastructure is one of the cheapest, cleanest, fastest ways we know to cut energy use and reduce emissions. In fact, the Department of Energy estimates that energy efficiency along, could cut national energy use by 20 percent in 20 years. It's a no-brainer вЂ“ which is slightly higher standard than the current one we have Washington.

This is an issue whose time has come. And I'm proud to co-sponsor Senator Dodd and Senator Hagel's National Infrastructure Bank Act that we just introduced to establish a federally-backed independent bank that will evaluate and finance large infrastructure projects by subsidies, loan guarantees, and bonds backed by the full faith and credit of the United States.

That's what our competitors are doing. They are on the march. You know Japan, and China, and even India, and certainly Europe, they are making progress and we are treading water and being swept backwards.

Now, will all this be easy? Of course not. But I believe that it is imperative and it is truly one of the challenges that it is going to determine whether we're up to the task of remaining a great nation with the strongest middle class in the history of the world, and a rising standard of living and quality of life.

I have faith that we will answer the call. A country that dug a 363 mile canal, by hand with only the help of mulesвЂ“ that built a railroad from one coast to the other вЂ“ that connected communities across America with more than 45,000 miles of highway вЂ“ that sent a man to the moon вЂ“ that's who we are as Americans. You know, one of the most discouraging aspects of the Bush-Cheney Administration is the way they have talked down America. They have been fatalistic. I reject that out of hand. We can do whatever we set our minds to. We can roll up our sleeves. We can be problem solvers again. And I have faith that we will answer that call. With your help we will rebuild America

Thank you very much.

Thank you, thank you all so much, and I would like to thank Becky for being here and for chairing the democratic party in Dallas County, its was wonderful Becky, thank you so much.
We have a full house, some of you know, we were originally planning to do this in a slightly smaller setting, so there are one or two chairs left, but not very many, there are a couple up here for people standing in the back. I see three here, it is not like church where we are going to call you forward, we want to try to give you a char to sit in.

I am thrilled to be here and there are a number of people who are with is that I would like to recognize starting with my great friends and your former governor and first lady Tom and Christie Vilsack who are here.

Another great friend of mine who has been active in Iowa and active on so many issues in Washington for so many years on your behalf is Ruth Harkin, Senator Tom Harkin's wife.

I want to welcome the mayor, Mayor Peard, thank you very much for being here; I really appreciate you coming,

I saw the State Senator, Staci Apple come in, thank you so much Staci for coming, and in a few minutes I'm going to introduce you to our very, very special guests who will talk about their own experiences concerning some of the issues that I want to raise today. So you will be hearing in a moment from Pat Twerpy, and Mary Rose Brown, and I am very happy they are here because what they will talk about are issues that are affecting seniors and their families.

But I want to start this morning by asking a few questions:

How many of you are caring for an aging relative or know someone who is? You can raise your hand.

And how many of you have every worried about whether social security and Medicare will still exist when your children and your children and your grandchildren may need it.

I think every hand went up on that one

How many of you do not want to be a burden on your children either emotionally or financially when you retire or if you have already retired.

Yea lots of hands, my mother is 88 and let me tell you that is how she feels.

Now, I know that behind me we have got, you know ready to change, and ready to lead. Well I think we're ready for changes when it comes to helping take care of our seniors but to recognize, as all of the hands just did, that we are not talking only about issues that effect seniors these are family issues.

These are issues that effect all generations together. There're really American issues and we've had in the past leader who have called on us as a nation to make smart choices about what needs to be done.

Yesterday I was in Dubuque talking about some of the issues that I think are important on this campaign and I mention that it was 72 years ago yesterday, that president Roosevelt singed the social security act.

And when he signed the social security act he made it very clear that it was just a corner stone in a structure that was being built, but was by no means complete. And certainly President Johnson 30 years later knew that we had to do something in order to help, seniors who didn't have the resources, as they aged to be able to deal with the health problems that do come, the older you get. You know that old story, the good news is, that you wake up in the morning, and the good news is you know that because you hurt everywhere.

And so I think everybody knows as we get a little older, and things start to break down a little and you need some more help. And so President Johnson recognized that and when he signed the Medicare bill, he said no longer will this nation refuse to hand the justice to those who have given a lifetime of service, and wisdom, and labor, to the progress of this progressive country.

Well I consider myself a modern progressive. I am proud of all of the progress, we've made as a nation. But it didn't happen by accident, I didn't happen by wishing for it, it happened because people came together, and worked to achieve them. And sometimes over great odds, to reach what we saw as goals for our county.

Well today we face a new set of challenges. In part because of the very success of programs like social security and Medicare. The good news is, we are living longer, and we are living healthier lives. But we still have to figure out, how we are going to get our system to catch up, with what is the reality of life today. Long term costs already consume 40 percent of what we spent on Medicaid, and is estimated by 2040, that's going to grow by more than 250 percent.

The average cost of a private room in a nursing home today is more than 70,000 dollars a year. The average hourly rate for home health aids has gone up 13 percent over this past year.

Medicare also faces significant financial challenges they are driven by the spiraling cost of health care. And unfortunately we are not addressing any of these issues and planning for the future. Our current president hasn't called on us to make a national commitment to saving social security and Medicare and in fact he's tried to privatize social security and instead of focusing on Medicare he has given tax cuts to billionaires and contracts to companies like Halliburton and his answer to the prescription drug needs of our seniors is a plan that takes a PHD in bureaucracy to figure out and as you'll hear in a minute, it is not working for a lot of people, Medicare part D.

Now this is all consistent with how this president sees our country. He wants to leave everything up to the individual. He believes in the "you're on your own" society. And if you look at you're on your own and you take the first letters, that's the yo-yo society. (Applause, describes the up and down)

Well I think its time that we talked about and confronted a lot of these issues because for too many people, its like they're invisible to the president, we don't see what's happening in the lives of people here in Iowa, and across the country from this White House, and I think that's outrageous because so many people have worked hard their entire lives and they realize they cant afford to retire.

I was in Las Vegas two days ago, and I was in a super market, and I was shaking hands with everybody working in the super market, and I met a man, and he looked to be elderly. He looked to be probably in his 80's, but ha had a staff badge on, so I greeted him, and I said, "Are you working here?"

He said "I have to; I don't have enough money for my wife and me to live on." So what do they have you do? He said, "well you know I kind of help around and greet people and try to guide people to where they need to go but I don't know what I would do if they didn't give me a job. In his 80's

If you're a senior who has diligently paid your long term care insurance premiums for years, only to have the insurance companies turn around and deny you benefits because of some technicality buried in the fine print of your policy, well you're invisible to.

And if you are a mother or father trying to raise your children and care for your aging relatives you're at your wits end trying to juggle it all. And you are invisible as well.

And if you are that grandmother or grandfather struggling to make ends meet and heartsick at the thought of burdening your children and your grandchildren, it turns out you are invisible as well.

Well I want you to know that you are not invisible to me. And you certainly are not going to be invisible to the next president of the United States. Because when we take back the White House, we are going to start seeing our fellow Americans again. (Applause)

I have a very different vision of our country; it's more in line with Franklin Roosevelt, Harry Truman and Lyndon Johnson, than George W. Bush. Because I reject the idea of a "on your own" society, the yo-yo society, I think it is far better if it's a we're "all in this together society" where we're helping each other. You know, I wrote a book called it takes a village to raise a child; well it also takes a Village to care for your aging relatives.

You need these people to be there for you, to back you up. To provide some respite care and we're going to try and create support for people to do the most important work any of us will ever do and that's taking care of each other. Whether it's our children, or our parents, or our spouses.

I don't think long term care is a burden, I think it is a fundamental obligation. And I think if we work hard together, we can get policy that will help us all do what we should do as members of families.

First, when I am president, I am going to take immediate steps, to address the growing problem of fraud and abuse committed against our seniors.

And I am going to start with the long term care market. You know in recent years, millions of Americans have done what they thought was the right thing. They have done out and they have purchased long term care insurance policies, they see the adds on TV, they get the phone calls at home, you know, they are talking for their neighbors, maybe a church somewhere people are saying, we got to prepare for the future, so guess what, millions of American have done that, including 128,000 right here in Iowa. And they though they were being responsible, that if they ever needed long term care, it was paid for.

Only to find out when they actually needed the coverage the company denied it for no good reason. Or they increase the premiums, or they withheld payments for months and even though people have been paying the premiums for years, they were stuck with the bill.

Now the bill can run into 10's of thousands of dollars pretty quick. And many of you probably read the heartbreaking series in the des Moines Register over the last week or two and it describes what the means for families here in Iowa. Well, I became concerned about this, and back in march I wrote a letter to the government accountability office demanding an investigation into these practices, what was going on. Because I was starting to hear these long term care policies are kind of new so it's only now that people are really starting to try and collect on them and get the help that they need from them. So in my office in New York, and people around the country are starting to hear these stories and I want to know what is really gong on.

Now as president, I will require all insurance companies that benefit from federal tax advantages or that want to market their products, through the federal employees' health benefit plan, which is all of them, they're going to have to meet new consumer protection standards. That will be the fastest way to begin to regulate this market, because the federal employees' health benefit program covers 9 million federal employees to compete for the business. So if they want to compete for the federal employees business, as well as Mary Rose's or Pat's business, they are going to have to meet standards that will protect against fraud and abuse. They're going to have to disclose their average rate increases over the past 10 years so that seniors know which companies inflate their prices. We are going to put all of that in an easily accessible format, so that people can get the information they need before they make a choice.

We're going to require that they put all of their fine print into easy to understand English. People are going to be able to read it, know exactly what it says, and what they are purchasing. No more hiding behind, loopholes and traps that they spring on seniors when the seniors need the help.

We are going to require that insurers offer inflation protection, because many seniors don't realize that a nursing home facility that costs 150 dollars a day in 2007 could cost 400 dollars a day in 20 years.

So we have to protect against the cost going up and let seniors know what they are buying when they actually give that check over.

In addition, I will require that companies be more careful in setting their rates in the first place. So they will be less likely to hit seniors with ballooning premiums later.

If a company decides it wants to increase premiums, they are going to have to put a larger share of their increases into paying claims instead of building up their profits. And I will require insurers to sit down with potential buyers and assess whether long term care coverage is really right for them, because Medicaid already covers long term care for low income Americans. I don't think it's right that some companies are tricking customers into buying double coverage which they do not need.

And the way I see it, I don't think anybody should have to worry about some clause buried in 700 pages of fine print. Or having some insurance company make them feel that they're going to be secure, and when affect what they are doing is just pulling the wool over their eyes.

And we are going to put an end to that. We are going to change the regulations we are going to force them and then when seniors do have to move into assisted living or long term care facilities we want to do everything we can to protect them from abuse and neglect. You know, there are thousands of professionals and paraprofessionals who are providing excellent care for our seniors every single day. But sadly, senior abuse cases are on the rise. They jumped 20 percent in the last 4 years. I co-sponsored legislation called the patient safety and abuse prevention act.

We need a nation wide system of criminal background checks not only for long term care workers, but home health care workers as well. When someone comes into your home, you need to have confidence that that person will not hurt you, or rob you, or in some other way take advantage of you.

But you know elderly fraud and abuse, isn't limited to long term care, or home health care. For many of our seniors, it's on the other end of their telephone line. Today, 85 percent of the victims of telemarketing fraud are over 65. Fraudsters pray on seniors, offer prizes and sweepstakes, and lotteries that lure people, into a web of deception. I have seen things in what's happening in the mortgage market. A lot of seniors were talked into taking out home equity loans allegedly at low interest, and the interest was raised on them. And there are seniors across our country that are in danger of losing the home that they have purchased had paid off, until they bought into a home equity scam.

So it's not only on long-term care, we have got to send out the alarm, seniors should be extremely careful in buying anything somebody tries to sell you, over the telephone. And once someone has responded to any of these scams, their personal information is often added to a so-called "suckers list", which is sold to other fraudsters, making them prime targets for identity theft as well. That's why I'm proposing we give seniors and other victims, the right to sue companies that misuse their personal data to perpetuate fraud.

I also think, we need to have a center for telecommunications record privacy, because we've got to stay ahead of the fraudsters, they are a step ahead of us. You know, it started with people calling from I think Nigeria or somewhere years ago, saying that if you just sent me money, somebody will be saved from a terrible persecution and its gotten much more sophisticated than that, so we need people to be up to date about what is going on and we need one person in the government in charge of developing a coordinated strategy to protect personal phone records.

And years ago, about 4 years ago I think, I proposed legislation that you could not export people's private information unless they agreed to it. Because you know what happens with all these call stations, and other things that are going on in foreign countries, they have no laws protecting privacies so we've got to get smarter about how we are going to protect privacy and particularly protect our seniors

Second, when I am president we are going to offer a renewed commitment to social security. We have fought the president on his ill advised scheme to privatize social security, that was a terrible idea, and thankfully we beat him back and we are not going to have to face that.

But the problem is that the President has two big priorities, tax cuts for the wealthiest Americans and the Iraq war, and he hasn't paid for either one of them. He has put them on the giant credit card. (Applause)

And where has he gotten the money for tax cuts for the wealthy and the Iraq war? Two Sources: Borrowing from the social security trust fund, and borrowing from foreign countries like China.

We have got to get back to fiscal responsibility and shore up the social security trust fund. When my husband left office in 2001, because we had a balanced budget with a surplus, the social security trust fund was totally solvent and safe until 2055.

Six and a half years later with George Bush's reckless fiscal policies, its lost 14 years, its down to 2041. So we have to get back to fiscal responsibility and use those surpluses to shore up the social security trust fund, and I will do that.

Third we have got to get seniors a real prescription drug benefit that is truly there whenever they need it. Right now, American seniors pay 35 to 55 percent more for the very same drugs that seniors in Europe and Canada pay. And some pay hundreds, some even pay thousands of dollars a month for their medication. I did not vote for the Medicare part D plan. Because I thought it was a plan for drug companies and not a plan for our seniors.  And we are going to work, to reform and change that plan.

We're going to let our seniors through Medicare negotiate for lower prices with these drug companies, something that the bush administration has forbidden, now this makes no sense at all, why wouldn't you want to negotiate for a lower price if you were really on the side of seniors. You're on the side of drug companies, you don't want to negotiate for a lower price, well we're going to do that. We are also going to keep our fight up to allow the re-importation of American drugs back from Canada so people can by them safely.  As a lot of people have done over the years over the years.

And I know, I bet there are people, we are going to hear from them in a minute, from Mary Rose, I bet there are more people here who have fallen into the so called doughnut hole under part D of the prescription drug benefit. You know, you spend more than 2500 dollars and get no help until you spend more than 5000 dollars, that just doesn't make any sense at all, and we are going to hear a very specific example of that.

Fourth, here's an issue I care deeply about that nobody ever talks much about and that is we have to support the growing number of grandparents who are raising children. You know it's not an issue you hear much about, is it. But believe it or not four and a half million American children are living in grandparent headed households. Nearly 25,000

Of them here in Iowa. Many of these grandparents, and it is mostly grandmothers, find themselves in a very unexpected position. They are living on fixed incomes, they are not as strong and healthy as they used to be and all of a sudden they have to figure our school enrollment forms and health care and keeping up with small children again. I have been working on smoothing I call the kinship caregiver support act, its bipartisan; I introduced it several years ago to give more help to grandparents who are raising children later in life.

Programs like the Muscatine community Y here in Iowa provides support groups here in Iowa provide support groups and counseling and educational seminars and recreational activates.

I helped to start a housing complex in New York City for grandparents raising children so they can be safe together. They didn't want to life in apartments where there were people they did not want to trust with their grandchildren so it's all grandparents raising children and they support each other. We have to start thinking about how we are going to do more of that.

And finally as President I will continue the work I started in the senate to help seniors keep their independence and live in their won homes and communities. The work starts with our caregivers. The ones who are juggling the needs of sometimes growing children and aging parents. And maybe having to work full time as well. And if everybody who is giving care stopped today it would cost 300 billion dollars to replace [cut off]

This is not only the right thing to do; this is an economic service being done to care for people who cannot totally care for themselves. But just because family care giving is unpaid does not mean it doesn't cost. And obviously it's very rewarding and important but it can be exhausting and expensive. And I was proud to finally pass legislation I introduced called the lifespan respite act, to give temporary relief to those caring for their loved ones. [Cut off]

I also think we should consider tax credits for individuals and caregivers, tax deductions for long term care insurance. And now there is a new phenomenon where people are banding together themselves to help buy services that they will need in order from them to stay in their own homes.

So I am very hopeful that we can really focus [cut off] on the issues that seniors talk to me about. You know my 88 year old mother who has always been very independent, after my father died in 1993 she did not want to give up her home; she didn't want to move in with any of her children, so she held on as long as she could. But it got to be difficult driving and that's what really convinced her that she could no longer live on her own because she couldn't see well at night to drive and see needed 

I am deeply honored to be here, and I greatly appreciate the privilege of addressing you and the invitation to do so.
I couldn't help, as I was preparing to come here today, thinking about my late father, a World War II veteran, served as a Chief Petty Officer in the navy training young men during World War II at the Great Lakes Naval Station. I imagine he is looking down and saying "I never thought I would see my daughter addressing the VFW" and I'm sure many of you didn't either but I am so excited to have this chance and I want to start by expressing my deepest gratitude to all of you and to the veterans you represent across our country for the service you and they have rendered to our nation.

I also want to thank the Commander in ChiefвЂ”thank you Gary for that very kind introduction. I want to acknowledge and congratulate your Senior Vice Commander in Chief who assume the Commander in Chief position, George Lisicki. And I want to acknowledge both the National Ladies Auxiliary President Linda Meader and Senior Vice President Virginia Carman.

Because it is always true that when we send one of our very best to serve our country, particularly when they go to war, their families serve as well. And I am grateful for the service of the family members who are here today.

I want to acknowledge a few of your guests and friends of mine. I know that Governor Corzine was here earlierвЂ”I saw him as he was leaving. Two members of congress who do an excellent job not only for their constituents but for their country and particularly for the values and security of AmericaвЂ”Congressman Emanuel Cleaver and Congressman Dennis Moore. And two old friends of mine and of yoursвЂ”Hershel Gober and Mary Lou Keener who have served with distinction in the Pentagon and the Veterans Administration and I am very pleased that they could be here with me.

I also know you'll be hearing from others who are pursuing their party nominations and immediately after I conclude a friend of mine and a genuine American hero will stand here before youвЂ”Senator John McCain.

I want to acknowledge not only John's service to our country, his heroism in the face of unspeakable atrocities, but his continuing leadership. I was privileged to go to Iraq and Afghanistan with Senator McCain. He and I were in Baghdad and Fallujah and Kabul together and I have the greatest respect for him.

Just like him and all of you, in America's darkest hours you answered the call, coming from every corner of our nation вЂ“ serving every part of the world -- on beaches and in jungles, across deserts and mountains and through bullet-scarred streets. You came from different backgrounds, from all walks of life, but you served because you know that freedom is never granted вЂ“ it is earned by each generation.

The history of America is forged and sanctified by the men and women who loved their country enough to sacrifice their lives for it. You and your fallen comrades know that in the face of tyranny, cruelty, oppression, extremism, sometimes there is only one choice. When the world looked to America вЂ“ America looked to you. And you never let her down.

I know how deeply my own father cared about the young men he sent off to the South Pacific and how heartbroken he was when so many of them never returned. When he died 14 years ago I received letters and pictures from many of the men he helped to train and looking at those pictures of all those young faces reminded me of the incredible sacrifice that not only that greatest generation but every generation of Americans have made.

As the poet, Archibald MacLeish, reminds us in his poem "The Young Dead Soldiers Do Not Speak," those we have lost "have a silence that speaks for them at nightвЂ¦They say: We have done what we could but until it is finished it is not doneвЂ¦They say: our deaths are not ours; they are yours; they will mean what you make themвЂ¦They say: we leave you our deaths. Give them their meaning."

How do we give those lives their meaning? How do we continue the work you started at Normandy, Guadalcanal, Chosin, Hue, Mogadishu, Sarajevo, Kandahar, Baghdad and so many other places? How, in the twenty-first century, do we preserve our democracy, protect our shores, keep our families safe, and continue to lead the world toward a better more peaceful future?

Your mission says it all. Honor the dead by helping the livingвЂ”through veteran services, community services, national security, and a strong national defense. But we have to begin with clear -eyed understanding of the new challenges and threats we face in the 21st century. From my service on the Senate Armed Services Committee, to my time as a First Lady and Senator, I have been privileged to travel to more than 80 countries representing America.

Whether I was meeting in Kabul with President Karzai about the threat of the Taliban and al Qaeda, or Israeli leaders about the threat of Iran, or meeting with defense officials in Europe about shared security interests, or pressing officials in China about human rights вЂ“ I have confronted the complexities of the world as it is вЂ“ not as I hoped it would be. Because you have to start with what the world is today and with hope and determination and understanding move it toward what we hope it can be. But I have never lost faith in America's essential goodness and greatness. I believe no challenge or threat is too dangerous or difficult for us to meet. If we work together, if we have sensible policies, if we cross the partisan divide that too often substitutes for reason and come together around our shared values and a commitment to that future we want for our children and grandchildren.

That's the American way, I believe. Throughout our history, when we've faced challenges to our position in the world or threats to our security, we've confronted them head on without fear, without delay, without hesitation. And that is exactly what I intend to do as president. I will start by standing up every single day for the men and women who have stood up for us: our veterans.

I know all too well that unfortunately, our veterans haven't always felt welcomed, respected and cared for by the country they served. I think particularly about the young men of my generationвЂ”Vietnam veterans, many of whom felt like they returned to America, but never really came home.

Well, let me be clear. Every servicemember is a hero who deserves our respect and our gratitude not just on Veterans Day or Memorial Day вЂ“ but every single day.

When they put on that uniform вЂ“ when they make that sacrifice for our American family вЂ“ then they are all of our sons and daughters, and it's time we started treating them that way.

Unfortunately too, we are far from having a government and a system worthy of our veterans' sacrifice. The truth is that the deplorable conditions at Walter Reed were just one symptom of a much larger problem.

I have met with soldiers around our country and around the world. I have been honored to represent some of the very best as a Senator from New York. I have been often to Fort Drum in northern New York, home of the 10th Mountain Division, the most deployed division in the US Army. I have been to military hospitals. I have listened to the problems and concerns of our veterans and our wounded warriors and their families. Heartbreaking stories of having to confront red tape and bureaucracy after dodging sniper bullets and escaping improvised explosive devices. Stories of struggling just to get the care and treatment they need. It's embarrassing and it's disgraceful that there is one veteran, let alone scores and hundreds of them, who have such stories to tell. It's time we fought as hard for our troops and our veterans as all of you have fought for us going back to the beginning of our country.

And that is what I've tried to do as a private citizen, as First Lady, and as a Senator. I remember when I started getting letters in the White House. We have these massive correspondence unitsвЂ”hundreds of thousands of people write the President, write the First Lady, they even write the pets of the first family. Buddy and Socks got a lot of mail during those years. And I remember that the people working in the correspondence units started coming to me with letters that were addressed to me often from veterans or from their wives about what was happening to people who had been in the Gulf during the First Gulf War and who had come home and now were suffering from undiagnosed illnesses. And I took the letters and I went to my husband and I said "Bill I think there's something happening here." One or two or three lettersвЂ”that might be a coincidence, but dozens of letters? Where young men who could run marathons and lift weights before they went to the Gulf could hardly climb up stairs now, can't sleep at night. And he said, "Look into it, find out what's going on." So I worked to establish the Commission that recognized Gulf War Illness for the serious problem it was, and began to address it. I still meet some of those veterans and their families. A lot of them are still suffering but at least they feel that we are recognizing that something happened to them when they were serving us.

So when I got to the Senate, I advocated for legislation to track our troops' health before they were deployed and after they were deployed, so that we would have baseline examination. Because too many of the people who came back from the Gulf War were told that the VA or that within the DOD system that we have no evidence that you weren't suffering from something before you went over and I said, "No wait. We have to make sure that we have a system to track the health of each and every person who serves us and then monitor them for illnesses."

I joined with colleagues on both sides of the aisle to increase military survivor benefits from $12,000 to $100,000вЂ”hardly any kind of compensation for the loss of a life but a way of recognizing the needs of the families who are left behind.

And I worked for four years with Senator Lindsey Graham, from South Carolina, to provide access to Tricare for National Guard and Reserve members. When I got to the Senate I'm sure many people thought I would never talk to Lindsey Graham, let alone work with him, but I decided that we had a job to do and he in South Carolina and I in New York were seeing the same thingsвЂ”that is, our National Guard and Reserve troops were being activated to go to Iraq or Afghanistan, many of them were considered medically unready because they were uninsured in their private civilian lives. They worked for employers who didn't provide insurance, they were self employed and couldn't afford it, they were young and didn't think that they had to really worry about their health but a thorough exam found problems. So Senator Graham and I said we're going to make sure that if you're a National Guard or Reserve member, you will have access to healthcare and you'll be part of this great American military from the very beginning. We will take care of you and your families.

I join with many of you to fight the so called Cares Commission that tried to close down so many VA hospitals. Well we fought them in New York and I'm proud to say that we had more letters of support to keep Canandaigua hospital in upstate New York open than any other facility in the country. And we were able to keep our hospitals from Canandaigua to Manhattan. At a time when we're getting more returning veterans, what sense does it make to shut down facilities when people have to drive hours and wait months before they can see a doctor at a VA. We need more facilities, more outpatient, more outreach in order to help our returning veterans.

Last year, I authored the Heroes at Home Act that will begin to help servicemembers struggling not only with post traumatic stress disorder but with the new signature wound of these wars, something called traumatic brain injury. I'm fighting as hard as I can to expand my legislation which passed last year because this is taking a devastating toll on our veterans and their families.

I was recently at Walter Reed and I met a young army captain. He'd lost his right arm in an improvised explosive device attack in Baghdad. He'd also lost his ring finger on his left hand because his wedding ring had melted into his finger. And I asked him, I said, "well captain, how are you doing?" He said, "Well Senator, I'm making progress. I'm getting great help. The prosthetic is working. I'm really feeling like I'll be able to get mobility back." But he said, "Senator, where do I go to get my brain back?" He was suffering from traumatic brain injury. He said, "You know, if it weren't for my wife who has moved here to be with me and who gives me a list everyday of where I have to go and what time I have to be there, I don't know what I would do." He said, "You know, Senator I went to West Point and I can't remember where I'm supposed to be at 10 o'clock or 11 o'clock every morning."

That's why I have proposed providing family members the education and training they need to help their loved ones with TBI and giving them the option to become certified caretakers and paying them for providing this care for their own family members.

Two weeks ago I teamed up with Senator Chris Dodd to pass legislation in the Senate to extend the Family and Medical Leave Act to families of wounded warriors. This was a recommendation from the commission the president appointed headed by former Senator Bob Dole, a great American war hero and former Health and Human Services Secretary Donna Shalala. They said "The Family Medical Leave Act is great but it's not enough." If you're going to give up your job and move from the west coast to Walter Reed or somewhere else in the country to be with your loved one who's been injured, you need more time and you need to make sure your job is safe while you're there doing the most important work any of us doвЂ”caring for those who care for us.

When I'm President, I will continue this work and this record. I will summon the resources and will of this nation to give our veterans the gold standard health care, earned benefits, and support they deserve. Our veterans have served America вЂ“ and it is time that America served our veterans.

I will start first by ensuring that my Veterans Affairs Department is on your side. And that my VA Secretary is a true veterans' advocate who understands the problems of our veterans. I'm not going to have a Secretary of Veterans Affairs вЂ“ I'm going to have a secretary for veterans, someone who will be qualified and committed and dedicated every single day to help our veterans.

I will also work to guarantee funding for VA health. It is outrageous that veterans have to come every year to the Congress begging for the money they need to get the health care they deserve. We're going to work toward mandatory funding and end the yearly budgets.

Health care for our veterans is not an option. It is a fundamental obligation, and we have seen what has happened the last several years. When many of us have fought for increased funding for veterans, only to be denied вЂ“ and then to come back later and have to put more money in. But, how do you run a veteran's health care system if you don't know what your budget is going to be, from year to year? You can't make the kind of changes that we were on the road to making in the 1990's.

Former Veteran Secretary Jesse Brown, a great American veteran, who we lost too soon, and Hershel Gober and others, had the VA headed in the right direction. We were streamlining the health care. We got the computerized medical records вЂ“ there are articles being written in medical journals today which say that now the VA system takes better care of many veterans with diseases like diabetes and heart conditions than out in the public. And what did that mean? More veterans started going to the VA. I thought that was great, the administration thought it was a problem.

Well I want to get back to where veterans want to go to the VA, where they feel the choice is best for them, and where we have the services readily available to take care of whatever problems any veteran might have.

Secondly, I have proposed a new GI Bill of Rights for the twenty-first century вЂ“ and when I'm President, we will pass it and I will sign it into law. We'll have the biggest signing ceremony in the history of the White House.

The original GI Bill of Rights was one of the VFW's signature accomplishments. It didn't just help a generation of veterans build their lives вЂ“ it helped a generation of Americans build a thriving middle class. So I take personal pride, tremendous personal pride in the fact that the VFW has endorsed my GI Bill of Rights. And I want to pay tribute to my House sponsor, young Congressman from Pennsylvania Patrick Murphy. I met Patrick Murphy when he was a Captain in the 82nd Airborne in Baghdad in 2003 when I was there on my first trip. That was still a time when we could get out of the green zone, we went to Sadr City, and we met with members of the 82nd, one of whom was this bright young Captain named Patrick Murphy. When he left the army he decided to continue his public service in another way. He ran for, and won, a seat in Congress. So when I was thinking about what kind of Bill of Rights, a GI Bill of Rights we needed for the twenty-first century, he was one of the first calls I made вЂ“ because he had lived it. And together, our bill provides educational opportunities вЂ“ from college, to trade and technical training, to certification and licensing programs. It expands opportunities for veterans to buy, build, repair and improve their homes. It creates a Veterans Micro-loaning Program to provide loans up to $100,000 at very low interest rates and without collateral, so that veterans can start their own small businesses. And I appreciate your support and we are going to get it done together.

Third, as President, I'll implement a new, seamless career transition assistance program. It will start the minute a servicemember steps back on our shores вЂ“ either at a base or at a medical center.

Each veteran will be provided a human resources counselor who will be responsible for his or her successful re-integration back into the civilian world. The counselor will have to track and monitor the veteran's progress вЂ“ and if a veteran is struggling, he or she will not get lost in the weeds of the red tape and the bureaucracy, but someone will be there to help him or her get back on track. And let's go one step further than that. Many companies already give preference for veterans. Let's make that universal. Our veterans have done an extraordinary job fighting for our country вЂ“ let's make sure they have the jobs they need and deserve right here at home.

Fourth, I want to transform the bureaucracy, we have a 20th century veterans' infrastructure and we need a 21st century system. I will do it by appointing a single, high-level experienced veteran, in the White House, reporting directly to me responsible for streamlining and coordinating all health care, educational and career programs for veterans. The reason I recommend this is because my last trip to Ft. Drum, I spoke to 50 of our 10th Mountain Division soldiers who had just came back from Afghanistan, all of whom had been wounded. The Department of Defense wasn't talking to the VA, the medical records at DOD didn't find them their way to the VA, and this made no sense to me at all. We need a single seamless system, and the way to get it done is to have someone in the White House reporting to the President, who will drive every single agency of this government to take care of every one of our veterans, the way they deserve to be taken care of.

I will also ask this person to oversee what has been another disgrace, because I will devote the resources we need to process, the endless backlog, the disability and life insurance claims. I have walked through VA offices and seen stacks of papers that have not yet been processed. I think we've had enough of the delays. I believe everyone should know that their government is working hard to give them what they have earned. I've already sponsored legislation, calling for an independent review of denied disability claims, and assigning more lawyers and social workers to help people through the claims process.

I've proposed legislation to require an independent review of every single traumatic insurance claim. It's another thing that the soldiers at the 10th Mountain Division told me they would call to get their insurance claim processed, they wouldn't get a human being's voice, they would never get a call back вЂ“ well we're going to end that. No one should be wrongly deprived of their earned benefits. And we're going to make sure when I'm President we clean up that backlog and make it work for every single one of our veterans.

And finally, finally we will end the prohibition on concurrent receipt for our disabled veterans. I'm a proud co-sponsor of the Retired Pay Restoration Act of 2007. This rule is nothing more than a tax on disabled veterans, and when I'm President, we'll do away with it once and for all.

Yesterday we had another of the debates, that are seeming to come earlier and more frequently in this election season. And one of the questions was whether a candidate represented change or experience. Well, I think we need both in our next President. And, with me, it's not either or.

I have 35 years of experience fighting for real change and I will use my experience to change Washington starting on day one. I know it won't be easy, I know how difficult this job is, I have seen it in an up close and personal way for eight years. And it's going to be especially hard because of all the difficult issues we face. But I believe we can do this, I'm confident and optimistic that we can pull our country together. And, our first order of business here at home, has to be taking care of our veterans.

But when all is said and done, caring for our veterans is about more than laws we pass or programs we fund. It's about the values we promote and the culture we create. A woman I met in Iowa provided a perfect example of what I mean. She told me that when military people come into her salon for a haircut, she gives them a discount as a way of saying thank you for serving our country.

Now, can a President sign an executive order or pass a law to require this? Of course not. But I believe it is the President's job to foster a culture of gratitude and respect for the men and women who serve in our armed forces.

So when I'm President I will call upon our people to come together to support our veterans, in large ways as well as those small important kindnesses and recognition that can mean so much. Whether it's offering a job, or inviting someone to your child's school to speak, or saying a simple thank you line at church or in the line at the grocery store. We owe them everything and that means confronting our national security challenges with courage, strength and wisdom.

We all know that one of our key challenges is what to do about the war in Iraq. I have met with our brave men and women serving in Iraq, and I have seen first hand, the sacrifices they are making.

And when the history of the Iraq war is written, I want future generations to know that our troops did everything our country asked of them, everything their commanders asked of them, everything their comrades expected of them, everything they expected of themselves.

They were asked to get rid of Saddam Hussein and bring him to justice, and they did. They were asked to provide the Iraqi people with free elections so that they could elect their own government, and they did. They were asked to give the Iraqi government the space and time they needed to do what only the Iraqi's could do to stabilize their own country.

There is a vigorous debate in our own nation вЂ“ and probably among many of you вЂ“ about the right way forward in Iraq. I know we may disagree about whether there is or isn't, a military solution to this war. Having been there, having studied it, and having seen the heroism and the accomplishments of our troops, I do not believe that we alone can impose a military solution. And I do not think the Iraqi's are ready to do what they have to do for themselves yet. Therefore, I think it is unacceptable for our troops to be caught in the crossfire of a sectarian civil war while the Iraqi government is on vacation. I that it is time that the Iraqi government took responsibility for themselves and their country. Because the American people and our American military cannot want freedom and stability for the Iraqis more than they want it for themselves.

As we move forward in these next months, awaiting a report from General Petraeus, we'll have some very hard decisions to make. I'm not sure there are any good options but one decision I know we will make is to continue to honor the service of our own American troops and to make sure that they are given the respect that they so richly have earned.

Some of us who disagree, I think the best way of honoring their service is by beginning to bring them home, and making sure that when they come home that we have everything ready for them.

But Iraq is not the only serious challenge we face. We have seen in the last months a resurgent Taliban and al Qaeda in Afghanistan and along the border with Pakistan. I have been one of those who from the beginning have said we never put enough troops into Afghanistan, and we should've stayed focused on wiping out the Taliban, and finding, killing, capturing Bin Laden and his chief lieutenants. Now we're playing some catch up. But Afghanistan is critical, because it is in an arena where the Afghan people are real allies, their government is working hard, they are trying to build an independent, strong military, and we cannot let them fail. These are just some of the challenges we face in this increasingly complex world.

One area that I am particularly concerned about is the spread of global terrorism. As a Senator from New York, I am too familiar with the horrors of the attack on our city and our country on 9/11. I was there the day after with a small group of office holders and I saw those fire fighters coming out of that black curtain of smoke and debris, we couldn't even see them until they broke clear, having worked around the clock, dragging their fire axes. And at that moment, I certainly made a commitment I have tried to follow through on, and that is not only to do everything I could for our first responders, who like our Gulf War veterans suffered because of the work they did at Ground Zero. Many of them not only getting sick, but now dying of the exposures that they breathed, starting after the attacks. But I also made a full commitment to martial American power, resources and values in the global fight against these terrorists.

That begins with ensuring that America does have the world's strongest and smartest military force. We've begun to change tactics in Iraq, and in some areas particularly in Al Anbar province it's working; we're just years too late changing our tactics. We can't ever let that happen again. We can't be fighting the last warвЂ”we have to be preparing to fight the new war and this new war requires different tactics and strategies. We have to be prepared to maintain the best fighting force in the world. I proposed increasing the size of our army by 80,000 soldiers, balancing the legacy systems with newer programs to help us keep our technological edge, reevaluating the training and education programs that servicemembers need in the 21st century. And let's be sure that the American military does not fight terrorism alone. It is time that we demanded that our alliances, including NATO, are united with us in this fight and that their intelligence, law enforcement, and homeland security systems are working together with ours. And let's not forget, that the War on Terror like the Cold War is fundamentally a battle over ideas and values.

I'm fighting for a Cold War medal, for everyone that served our country during the Cold War, because you were on the front lines of battling communism. Well, now we are on the front lines of battling terrorism, extremism, and we have to win.

Our commitment to freedom, to tolerance, to economic opportunity has inspired people around the world вЂ“ they're not just what we fight for, they can be our most powerful weapons in this fight.

I want to get back to a point, where people respect and admire the United States again not just because that would be a good thing, but because that's critical on our fight against terrorism.

People have to root for America, they have to want to be on our side. Somebody knowing that another member of their community is perhaps putting together suicide bombs kits has to think twice about whether to say nothing or maybe to tell somebody. Law enforcement in countries that could become havens for terrorists have to believe that American values are not just about America, but they speak to the human dignity that God given spark that resides in each and every person across the world.

I want to end with this story because it sums for me what I hope to do as your president. It's told to me by my friend, and our former Secretary of State Madeleine Albright. As some of you may know she was born in the former Czechoslovakia, her family had to deal with the Nazis, they had to deal with the communists, they came as refugees to America. And in 1995 Madeline was asked if she would represent our country at the 50th Anniversary commemoration of the end of WWII and she immediately said yes. And she went to Europe particularly to countries behind what we used to call the Iron Curtain and everywhere she traveled she saw American flags but when she looked more closely she realized that a lot of those flags had only 48 stars. She started asking people, "where did this flag come from?" And everyone told her the same storyвЂ”that when the American GI's liberated Europe, they passed out these flags. And remember, back then Hawaii and Alaska weren't states yetвЂ”that's why there were only 48 stars. And people had saved these flags like family treasures, passing them down from grandparent to parent to child often at great risk because if the Soviet occupiers had found them with an American flag they could have gotten into serious trouble. So Madeline asked them, "Why did you save these flags all these years knowing you could have gotten in trouble?" And everyone said the same thing, "because we love America and we love America's values and we always hoped some day we'd be able to live in freedom like Americans."

They never gave up on America's ideals and neither should we.

These are the ideals that will light our way forward just as they have illuminated our past. They're the ideals that inspired you to leave your homes and families and everything you knew and loved to fight for our freedom around the world. Standing here with you, I feel that same sense of hope and optimism that has always marked our country. And I want to be the president who restores those feelings about America around the world. We are a good and great nation. We can renew the promise of America here at home and we can stand tall for freedom and democracy around the world again.

I believe that with the right leadership and with a country committed to a future that reflects the best of who we are, the twenty-first century will be America's century.

And we will continue our history in an unbroken line from those first soldiers who fought for our revolutionary ideal that all men are created equal to those young men and women who are fighting for us and our ideals right now. With your help and God's help we can once again be the country that all of us love, admire and know is worth fighting for.

Thank you all very much, and God bless you.

Thank you. Thank you all very much. Thank you Nancy for your introduction and for your leadership of this great medical center, and to Frank McDougall who has also helped very much in putting this event together. I also want to thank Dr. Susan Lynch for being here. Some of you know that Dr. Lynch did her residency at Dartmouth-Hitchcock and she's a pediatrician who works as a pediatric lipid specialist at the cholesterol treatment center at Concord Hospital in Concord.
It would be interesting to know just as historic fact when the first pediatric lipid specialist was certified because one thinks about cholesterol as a problem of us, the adult world. And now we know, as Dr. Lynch too well knows, with her advocacy on behalf of physical activity and trying to stem the tide of obesity among our children, how significant this is and I'm just absolutely delighted that she could be here today. It's also a pleasure being back here. I just had the opportunity to say hello to some of the physicians and nurses and staff members who run this great center. And a number of them reminded me that I was here in 1993, I actually met some of them before this occasion and I am thrilled to be back because I cannot imagine a more fitting place to talk about improving healthcare quality in America than at this institution which has helped to set the standard for excellence for more than 200 years.

As I travel across New Hampshire -- and certainly around our country -- I talk with people from all walks of life, it is really one of the great privileges of being in public life; I see the speaker here, and others who are involved in the day-to-day life of New Hampshire. You get to meet people you would have never otherwise met; you are invited into their lives, somewhat similar to what you do here, as you take care of them in very significant points of their life's journey. Well in the political arena we also have that privilege and no matter where I go, or with whom I talk -- whether it's a CEO or a small business owner or a doctor or a nurse or patient or a hospital administrator -- everyone tells me the same thing: "Our health care system isn't working and what can we do about it?" The costs are too high, the coverage too thin -- or in some cases non-existent -- the care not what it should be.

Now I have worked on health care, like Nancy said, for more years than I care to recount. Going back to 1979 and 80 in Arkansas, where I led an effort to try too bring more health care into rural areas, a problem we still have in Northern New Hampshire just as in Eastern Arkansas. And of course most memorably, during the eight years as First Lady.

Now despite the scars I carry from that, I also have learned some valuable lessons. And most importantly, that in order to answer any question about what we can do better to provide healthcare for all of our citizens in a cost effective quality driven way, we first have to establish a consensus in America. That this is a goal we intend to achieve together. We have to reach that consensus among providers, employers, employees, citizens, those who pay for, depend upon, and actually deliver healthcare services. And this consensus has to be strong enough to persuade decision makers in Washington and to overcome entrenched opposition among the forces that oppose change for ideological and corporate reasons.

Now the good news is that I think we are finally reaching consensus. I see businesses, labor, government and other stakeholders increasingly investing in quality care because they realize that it's not only good for individuals and families that it's also goof or our economy. We've begun to agree that there is an economic as well as a moral imperative to reign in costs and to extend coverage to all Americans. There's a practical imperative to improve quality -- to promote wellness and prevent illness wherever possible. And these are the key components of my health care plan--lowering costs for everyone, improving quality for everyone, and providing coverage for everyone. I list them as three interlocking goals because I think we cannot do one without doing all of them.

A few months ago, I outlined my agenda to reduce health care costs and today, I want to talk about health care quality. And next month, I will announce my plan for universal coverage. My order here is deliberate. In order to forge a consensus on universal health care, we need to assure people they'll get the quality they expect at a price they can afford. And my recommendations to control costs and ensure quality lay the groundwork for insuring everyone.

Now, by all accounts, we should already have the highest quality health care in the world. Our doctors, nurses and other health care practitioners are among the best in the world. They have access to the most cutting-edge drugs, and treatments and medical technologies. And we spend more money per capita on health care, almost $5,700, than any country in the world.

But we are far from having the best care. We're ranked 23rd in infant mortality and 42nd in life expectancy. According to the 2006 survey by the Kaiser Family Foundation and the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, 51 percent of Americans were dissatisfied with the quality of our health care system. According to a RAND study, adults in the United States on average fail to receive about one half the medical care they need. More than one in ten patients may receive care that isn't recommended -- and may be potentially harmful. And the Institute of Medicine estimates that as many as 98,000 Americans are killed each year by preventable medical errors.

Now in short, too often and in too may places, our health care system hurts us instead of helping us. It hurts doctors, who aren't rewarded for providing the best care -- and are often punished for it, financially at least. It hurts nurses, who are asked to work longer hours caring for more patients with fewer resources. And it hurts patients, who are forced to make complicated medical decisions without basic information about their conditions and options.

Now I'm hoping that we're getting to a point where the quality of our health care is not a partisan issue. Whether you're a Democrat or Republican, a liberal or a conservative, none of us wants to rush our child to an emergency room only to receive the wrong treatment. None of us wants to bring our spouse in for surgery only to see them next in the ICU with a preventable infection. None of us wants our loved one cared for by nurses who are juggling too many patients and too many medications with too little support.

And any of us could become seriously ill injured such that we won't have a second chance to get the right diagnosis and treatment. And when that day comes, why should we settle for less than the best?

But that is exactly what we're doing right now. When you buy a TV for your living room or a tire for your car, or a toy for your child, you want to know you're getting the best value -- and these days, especially with toys, the greatest safety. So you compare prices, you ask questions, you check the consumer reports and you rely on your government to establish and enforce basic guarantees of safety and reliability.

But too often, with the product we care most about --that can mean the difference between life and death, and between billions of dollars wasted and saved -- we don't compare prices or quality we wind up stuck with something whether we think it's best for us or not.

And until recently, government at all levels did not use its enormous buying power to empower providers and patients to demand and deliver quality. We plod along with a twentieth century health care system, unable to take full advantage of 21st century medical advances, stuck in the same rut of fatalistic thinking that's defined our healthcare debate for more than a decade. If we try to cover everyone, the argument goes -- we'll lower quality. If we try to improve quality -- we'll break the bank. Our health care problems are too big, too deep, too complicated, the argument continues, for us to solve.

Well, I reject that and I think all of you here at this exemplary institution do as well. America is not a nation that settles. We don't wring our hands and make excuses. We roll up our sleeves. We invent. We innovate. We come up with solutions. And that's exactly what hospitals and nursing homes and providers across America have been doing with very little support. Many are improving the care they offer and lowering costs.

Take the example of Kaiser Permanente. Their management came together with 40 unions representing 90,000 healthcare workers and staff and formed a Labor Management Partnership. The Partnership works to solve problems, improve patient care and give everyone a seat at the table.

One example of their work involved a patient complaint that nurses often did their shift handover without input from the patient--so union nurses worked with management to come up with a solution: doing the handover in the patient's room, where the patient could join in the conversation. As a result, patients better understand their care, nurses spend more time with patients, and information is being shared more efficiently.

Since Kaiser's partnership began, costs have fallen, workplace injuries have fallen -- and patient satisfaction and employee retention have improved. And this is just one example of how, across America, workers and management can improve healthcare quality.

Or take the example of Ascension Health, America's largest non-profit hospital system. Back in 2002, they began a system-wide effort to improve their quality of care -- to meet best practices and provide better treatments. Today, their rate of certain hospital infections is 62 percent lower than the national average. Serious patient falls are 86 percent lower. Rates of bedsores are 93 percent lower.

But in the end, quality health care isn't just about savings or statistics. It's about something much more fundamental: the relationship between physicians and patients, between nurses and patients, between physicians, nurses and hospital administrators. That's what's at the heart of our quality, how we get along with one another, what our relationships are. The moment when someone in need seeks you out, they're scared and vulnerable, they want you to do what can get them better, but too often our healthcare system stands in the way, blocking that relationship, preventing physicians and nurses from doing what they would want to do. So therefore, we have to change the system.

Well, I'm here today because I believe it's time we had a health care system that lived up to the Hippocratic Oath. A system that empowers doctors, nurses and hospitals to give the best care. That empowers patients to make the best decisions. And that ensures that payers -- governments and private payers-- value, reward and promote the best results: longer, healthier lives, and money saved in lowering and unproductive and unnecessary hospital and nursing home costs.

That is what my Health Care Quality Plan tries to do. We have come to these recommendations in consultation with doctors, nurses and others across the country. We've developed a plan to raise standards, support health care providers, educate patients, realign the reimbursement systems to reward quality, recruit and retain more nurses, and address the health disparities that continue to plague our system.

I want to start by talking about how we ensure that our health care providers -- doctors, nurses and others -- provide the best possible care.

That starts with providing federal support for doctors' own quality certification standards.

Now, most doctors stay current on their own -- reading up on the latest advances, studying the latest techniques. But changes are coming so fast these days; many tell us they just can't keep up. Some might not even realize they're no longer using the latest protocols or the best systems. This may explain the dramatic variations in cost and quality from state to state, town to town -- even from hospital to hospital in the same town. Now some of these variations have been discovered and publicized right here at Dartmouth, the studies conducted by Jack Weinberg and his colleagues here have revolutionized how many people think about quality of care. They found that the quality of care for patients with terminal illnesses, just to pick one example, varied greatly. The percentage of patients who died as hospital inpatients instead of at home or in a hospice, range from 32 percent to more than 52 percent despite the fact that the overwhelming number of Americans would prefer not to die in a hospital.

Part of the solution to these disparities can be found in doctors' own voluntary Maintenance of Certification programs, so called MOC programs. They provide lifelong learning opportunities to help doctors stay up to date. They're generally run by the boards of the various specialties -- so cardiology runs the MOC for cardiologists, or the pediatrics runs the MOC for pediatricians, and so on.

Doctors who participate in certification programs have better outcomes. Heart attack patients treated by board certified doctors were 15 percent less likely to die than those treated by non-certified doctors. Doctors who scored higher on MOC examinations had better outcomes in treating patients with diabetes, and they were more likely to ensure that their patients received mammograms.

So as President, I want to lend the support of the federal government to MOC process to help our doctors stay on the top of their game. I will offer higher Medicare reimbursement rates to doctors who participate in qualified MOC programs. And to ensure that the MOCs are sufficiently rigorous -- I'll ask that the Secretary of HHS to invest $125 million to recognize and help fund the work of a public-private Quality Trust to certify the MOCs. This Trust will bring together people from across the health care system -- doctors, patients, nurses and others -- who will rigorously review MOCs to ensure they are up to the highest standards.

If you have any doubt about whether we need to do this, I'd refer you to an article from this week's New York Times indicating that just 7 percent of diabetics are getting all of the treatment they need -- often because their doctors are not versed in the latest developments. Now, imagine if instead, these doctors participated in certification programs that kept them up to date on nationally recognized standards for diabetic care. The most revealing conclusion in the very long article was that most doctors were vigilant about blood sugar, but not about blood pressure and cholesterol monitoring. Think of how many more lives could be saved and how much more money could be saved if they were.

I'll also support doctors by creating a Best Care Practices Institute, a public-private partnership to fund comparative effectiveness research and disseminate it across the country. Right now so much of the information on which drugs, devices, surgeries and treatments work best, either isn't researched, it isn't compared, it isn't published, and it isn't circulated. It takes years for an agreed upon treatment that a medical center like this one knows is the best practice to be disseminated across our country. So this Best Practices Institute will serve as a central national clearinghouse so no matter where you are, you and your doctor can access information on what the best treatments should be.

In addition to helping doctors provide the best care, I plan to finally implement medical malpractice reforms that work for doctors and patients alike. Many of the physicians that I meet say that high malpractice premiums force them to alter their practice-- and even consider leaving the profession altogether. I've also heard first hand from families who've experienced serious medical errors and have trouble getting the relief that they deserve. The current political stalemate on this issue leaves both patients and physicians in the lurch.

Earlier before I came in I was speaking to the head of anesthesiology and I really give the anesthesiologists a lot of credit because for the last ten years they have moved toward standards of practice that have not only helped patients but dramatically lowered malpractice premiums and I believe there's a lot we can do within the specialties, following the example of anesthesiology, coming up with new approaches.

I've offered one solution based on a successful program at the University of Michigan Hospital system. It's called the National Medical Error Disclosure and Compensation Act. In the Congress you have to come up with acronyms so you search for days to try to name a piece of legislation with something that if you take the first letter it spells a word--so that is the MEDiC act for those of you who were wondering.

It's a novel approach to improving patient safety and the quality of care while protecting patients' rights, reducing medical errors and lowering malpractice costs. The bill that I have introduced based on the University of Michigan Hospital system would proved liability protections for physicians who disclose medical errors to patients and offer to enter into negotiations for fair compensation backed up by their hospital and their practice. At the University of Michigan, these policies have already resulted in greater patient trust and satisfaction, more patients being compensated for injuries, fewer malpractice suits, significantly reduced administrative costs, and between one and three million dollars in litigation cost savings.

But when I talk about supporting providers, I'm not just talking about doctors -- but about nurses as well. And that's the third step in my plan -- to immediately address our nursing shortage and to give nurses the training and educational and support that they need to provide the care patients deserve.

The nursing shortage has become a nursing crisis. And that means it's a crisis for everyone, because nurses are critical to delivering and improving quality. Our nurses are truly the eyes and ears --and in many ways, the heart and soul -- of our health care system. And when we've got fewer nurses, working longer hours, serving more patients -- the result can be worse outcomes. We currently face a shortfall of 118,000 nurses. If we don't take action now, by the year 2020, the estimate is that we will be short as many as one million nurses. In addition to the shortage, nurses are aging. On average a nurse is over 45 in America. So we need a comprehensive solution.

According to the American Association of Colleges of Nursing, in 2005, American nursing programs turned away nearly 32,000 qualified bachelor and masters degree applicants. They just didn't have the slots. So when I'm President, I will provide funding to nursing schools to allow them to admit and train more nurses and to recruit and retain more faculty. And I'll give first priority to schools with a record of sending graduates to serve in underserved areas -- from rural communities, to inner-cities, to low-income neighborhoods.

I'll also work to recruit more nurses to the profession in the first place -- reaching out to communities of color that are traditionally underrepresented, providing scholarships and loan forgiveness so we can have a more diverse, culturally competent nursing workforce.

But we know that the problem isn't just recruiting -- it's retaining nurses. Roughly 50 percent of new nurses leave their jobs within the first year -- all too often because they're not getting the support they need to do their jobs. I will address that by funding innovative mentoring and residency programs with a proven track record of helping to keep nurses in the profession.

Programs like the RN Residency program that was launched five years ago at Children's Hospital Los Angeles. This 22-week program provides new nursing school graduates with a comprehensive clinical experience to prepare them for careers in acute care environments. Prior to this program, turnover for new graduates during their first year was 36 percent. Graduates of the RN Residency program have a first-year turnover rate of just 11 percent, and a 24 month turnover rate that has dropped from 56 to 22 percent. Given that it costs roughly $50,000 to replace each nurse -- and thousands more to pay temporary nurses to fill in -- you can see the kinds of savings that Children's is experiencing.

I also want to do more to empower advanced practice nurses. We're going to have to change the practice, acts, and protocols that govern what nurses can do-- nurse practitioners, nurse midwives, physician's assistants, advanced practice professionals. Because it's clear that we will not be able to reach our goals for preventive care if we don't have better utilization of nurses.

We need to empower patients. And that means giving them the information they need to make the right choices. Today even the savviest, best informed patients struggle to choose providers and treatment options and it is easy to feel helpless and overwhelmed about these decisions.

Now some people will tell you the best way to provide consumer choice is to give everyone a Health Savings Account -- and leave them to find the least expensive, most effective providers on their own. If they're in good health, chances are that they'll be able to navigate this. But if they get seriously ill, or have an accident that is serious, well I don't think that there's much hope there.

The idea is that we have to really empower patients -- not shift costs on to them under the guise of so called "consumer-driven" care. So when I talk about informed consumer choice, I mean no one should have to guess their way through this maze.

That's why we need a comprehensive, patient-friendly quality database. With the click of a mouse, patients should be able to see which hospitals have the best care, the best specialists, the lowest infection rates, the most efficient discharge policies, the shortest emergency room waiting times, and more.

And that is exactly what you're doing here at Dartmouth-Hitchcock, publishing comprehensive public reports on everything from the quality of your cancer treatments and pneumonia care to your infection prevention rates. I'm so impressed by what you've done here and the difference that it is making that I have teamed up with Senator Judd Gregg and introduced bipartisan legislation to create this kind of system on a national scale using Medicare claims data to make risk-adjusted quality reports publicly available.

I also empower patients by making sure that the information that they get is understandable. The Center for Shared Decision Making here at Dartmouth Hitchcock is another perfect example. This center approaches medical decisions as collaboration between patients and doctors. Doctors take the time to talk with patients, discuss their concerns and their goals -- and then help them reach the outcomes they desire. And once again the results speak for themselves. 98 percent of patients report they understood their treatment choices. 96 percent said they realized which treatment risks and benefits mattered most to them as they made their decisions.

We cannot do this however if we don't invest in electronic medical records. I've already proposed this as legislation, a bipartisan piece of legislation that I have worked on for four and a half years, passed the Senate last year, it died in the house. But we're back with bipartisan legislation again.

It is essential that we begin to do this. Institutions like this have electronic medical records as do other of our medical centers and fine hospitals around the country but we're not creating a seamless system. We're not creating one where if you're a patient here and you're visiting family in Florida or if you're on a business trip to LA, your record can be easily transmitted. And while Amazon.com knows exactly which books you've bought and what music you like -- an emergency room doctor may have no way of knowing what medications you're taking, what you're allergic to -- or even what your blood type is.

Electronic medical records will change that. They'll ensure that patients can have secure, confidential access to their medical history wherever and whenever they need it. This will save, according to a RAND study, approximately 77 billion dollars a year. And it will also save lives.

The VA is a great example of a healthcare system that has dramatically improved the quality of patient care. The American Consumer Satisfaction Index Survey shows that VA patients were significantly more satisfied with both inpatient and outpatient care than patients in the private medical system. The New England Journal of Medicine found that VA healthcare ranked higher than Medicare in 12 out of 13 measurements of quality and the VA system achieves better rates of quality care for diabetics than commercial managed care organizations.

Now what made this success possible? Well, in part the use of information technology. During the Clinton Administration, a transition to a paperless system was accelerated and today the VA maintains electronic health records in 1,300 facilities for over 5 million veterans. And this enables someone to go from VA hospital to VA hospital and have that record be seamlessly delivered wherever it is needed.

The VA medical records system supports the use of advanced technology including mobile devices, wireless interfaces, and a barcode medication administration system in which patients are given a bar-coded ID tag. Nurses scan this tag when providing medications allowing them to confirm that the right person receives the right medicine at the right time. So the VA is doing it, there's no reason we can't do it across our healthcare system,

And through my coverage recommendations which I will be making next month, I want to come up with ideas to incentives patients and potential patients which includes all of us to make better decisions about our own health. Information alone about behaviors like smoking or obesity does not automatically result in change. We need both a renewed public health effort that I think should be lead by the president, stressing better health outcomes and financial benefits to motivate such changes through the way we pay for public and private insurance.

I want to emphasize that when I talk about empowering patients -- I mean all patients -- from all backgrounds and all walks of life. We are far from that goal now. Our health care system unfortunately is still plagued with racial, ethnic, socioeconomic and gender disparities at every level. And my goal is to eliminate those disparities once and for all.

Right now, African American infant mortality rates are more than double those for whites. More than one-fifth of American Indians do not have a reliable source of health care, as compared to 15 percent of whites. Asian-Americans are less likely to receive critical screening tests like mammograms and pap smears. Hispanics living with diabetes are almost 20 percent less likely to receive recommended diabetes treatments. And women are more likely than men to be hospitalized for high blood pressure -- a manageable chronic condition.

Minority populations aren't just sicker -- they also get lower-quality care. According to the annual National Healthcare Disparities Report released by HHS, African Americans and Hispanics received worse care than whites on more than 70 percent of the criteria used to measure quality.

This is simply unacceptable in our country. The quality of your care should have nothing to do with your ethnicity, skin color, or gender. And when I'm President, I will see to it that it doesn't. I will start by directing the Department of Health and Human Services to collect detailed, up-to-date information on healthcare disparities, so we actually can know the full extent of the .

I'll also invest in developing culturally competent health care for minority population. That means ensuring health care providers have access to the language skills they need to communicate with their patients -- and that patient information is appropriately translated into the many languages that a hospital often has to deal with.

Finally, I want to discuss the role of payers -- insurance companies and state and federal governments -- in providing quality health care.

I want to start with our reimbursement system. We have to completely re-haul this system. We need a system that actually encourages -- instead of discourages -- quality care. Right now, the incentives in our reimbursement system are upside-down and backwards. They often punish doctors are trying to do the right thing -- like spend time with their patients, trying to prevent, not just treat illness. Doing what's best for patients is sometimes bad for business.

Hospitals are paid for each episode of care, each hospitalization. Doctors are paid for each office visit, each procedure. People aren't paid to coordinate patients' treatments to ensure they get the best quality care. So let's say you are a diabetic with high blood pressure. Your doctor won't be reimbursed for hiring a nutritionist to track your weight and help you understand what you can and can't eat. Your hospital won't be reimbursed for hiring a nurse assistant to ensure you have regular appointments to get your feet and eyes checked. Or to make sure your blood pressure doctor and your diabetes doctor communicate with each other about your care. And healthcare providers who wish to work in teams to coordinate services and treat patients holistically receive lower reimbursements than if they all worked separately.

So we wind up treating patients like walking collections of symptoms and diseases -- each to be treated discretely. But that is not how illness works, that's not how the body or the mind works. For example, if you are a diabetic with high blood pressure, your high blood pressure obviously affects your diabetes, and vice versa. So there's incredible value to coordinating care and in having doctors, nurses, social workers, nutritionists and other professionals working together as a team.

That's exactly how it's done at the Mayo Clinic, one of the most respected health care institutions in America, actually probably in the world. Under their integrated healthcare system, primary care physicians work together with specialists to develop a comprehensive approach to treat each patient. The result is better care, lower costs, and fewer hospitalizations and doctor visits. The result is better care, lower costs, and fewer hospitalizations and doctor visits. In fact, if hospitalizations and doctor visits across America mirrored the numbers at Mayo, for certain conditions, inpatient Medicare spending would decrease 20 percent, Medicare costs for doctor visits would decrease 35 percent. That's billions of dollars in savings. But at the same time physicians salaries are above the national average. So when I'm President, I'll support federal reimbursements for precisely this kind of team approach to medicine. We know it saves money -- and saves lives.

I'll also ensure that the federal reimbursement system rewards care based on how effective it is. Today, we often do just the opposite. In a Pennsylvania government survey of the state's 60 hospitals performing heart bypass surgery, the best-paid hospital received nearly $100,000, on average for the operation, while the least-paid got less than $20,000. But at both hospitals, patients had comparable lengths of stay and death rates. And among the 20 hospitals serving metropolitan Philadelphia, two of the highest paid actually had higher-than-expected death rates. Now, we know we have to adjust for risk, and we know that very often the most difficult cases end up at the hospitals that have the greatest capacity. But I think we could do a better job in actually figuring out what we should be paying for -- work that has also been pioneered here at Dartmouth-Hitchcock.

With the right incentives, we can make a difference. Take the example of the Marshfield Clinic, in Wisconsin, where doctors are paid based on the quality of care they provide for common diseases like diabetes and heart disease. They could earn up to 80 percent of the Medicare savings that result from their good treatment. Preliminary results revealed a 50 percent increase in electronically documented foot exams for diabetes -- and a 29 percent decrease in hospitalization.

Another excellent example of incentivizing good care with smart reimbursement policies is the Bush Administration's recent decision to refuse Medicare payments for preventable infections, injuries and errors sustained during hospital stays. A sponge accidentally left inside a patient during surgery, a broken arm sustained when a patient is improperly handled. They're known as "never events," because they never should have happened. It's not often that I offer praise for the Bush Administration, but it is well deserved for this decision.

Now Michigan has had great success with systematic efforts to reduce infection rates in intensive care units. Hospitals in that state have reduced blood stream infections related to catheters, as reported in the New England Journal of Medicine. The hospitals did not use expensive new technology, but followed well-established infection control practices, like covering doctors and patients with sterile gowns and sheets when catheters were inserted.

So, As President, I won't just sustain these good policies at the federal and the state level -- I'll take it one step further. I'll insist that any insurance company wishing to provide coverage through the Federal Employees Health Benefits Program, which is all of them, has to also refuse to cover these costs. And I'll encourage private plans to follow suit. I believe we could not only save billions of dollars but thousands of lives over time.

Finally, ensuring that our reimbursement system rewards quality care also means ending insurance company discrimination against people with pre-existing conditions. Right now, insurance companies have free reign to cherry pick the healthiest patients and shut out everyone who seems like a "bad risk." In fact, they spend $50 billion a year on elaborate underwriting calculations and schemes to figure out how not to cover people or that not to pay you for what you do once you've delivered the service. As President, I'll put an end to that. I believe we should examine the patchwork nature of regulation of the insurance system. And I believe we have to end insurance discrimination.

Now, will all of this be easy? We just elect a new president? Will it just happen? Of course not. But let's remember, we're gathered today at the school that introduced the stethoscope to the American Medical School curriculum, took the first clinical X-Ray, established the first ICU. The institution that has always been pushing the boundaries, and looking toward that next horizon. Oliver Wendell Holmes, who served as a professor in this school back in the 19th century, put it best when he said, "I find the great thing in this world is not so much where we stand, as in what direction we are moving."

We may have a long road ahead of us, but I believe we're finally moving in the right direction. That we can empower patients to make the right decisions for themselves. We can empower doctors and nurses to deliver the best care that they want to, and are often prevented from doing so. We can have the highest quality health care system in the world and we can do it in a cost-effective manner. That's the direction that I'm headed in. And I'm proud to be at this institution, which has pioneered so many of the changes that benefit us today, and I hope that you'll all join me on this journey to better quality healthcare.

Thank you all very much.

Thank you. Oh my goodness, I'm very appreciative on a personal level for that wonderful introduction and it is a great pleasure for me to serve alongside such a great leader as Congressman Clyburn. I don't think there's any doubt in anybody's mind that he is a big dog. And he's a big dog who's leading the pack for our country and I'm very grateful that he would be here because obviously I am well aware there is a historic football game being played tonight. You know, when I heard that the dinner was going to compete with the game between the University of South Carolina and South Carolina State University, I thought for a moment that it might just be President Scott and me here. But I appreciate that so many of you are committed to the work of the NAACP here in Charleston, throughout the state, and indeed across the country.
And I am deeply honored that I could be with you. I want to thank our two MCs, who have done a wonderful job this evening. Thanks to both Octavia and Rafael. I also want to thank our two musical performers who I thought were unbelievably special, Daniel Davis and Crystal Brown Gibson. It's wonderful being here with so many elected officials and I'm grateful they are here to be with your mayor, whom I've known a very long time and am very proud of the work that has been done under his leadership in Charleston. And of course, it gives me a lot of pleasure to thank Dot Scott and to call her Madame President. I love the ring of that.

And I was very moved by the tribute to your fallen firefighters. Obviously, as a Senator from New York, I have some understanding of the pain and the loss, the grief and shock that losing those nine brave firefighters has caused in this community and particularly to their families. It reminds us every day of the preciousness of life and the both opportunity and obligation each of us has to do our part to advancing the cause of freedom, to caring for one another, for walking our individual journeys with a sense of a destination that is better for everyone. And that's what the NAACP has done for so many years and now with this 91st annual Freedom Fund Banquet, it continues the tradition. Dot and I went over and met some of the young people, the next generation of leaders for the NAACP, for this city, this state, and this country. I want to thank everyone who understands the mission of the NAACP. It is a big dog, but it's a dog with a conscience -- that's an unusual combination -- calling us to understand that, as Americans, we have to keep faith with all that came before.

The NAACP's leadership was evident these past few weeks, as you called the nation's attention to an example of present day discrimination happening in Jena, Louisiana. And the NAACP and people of goodwill everywhere stood up and made sure their voices were heard, asking tough questions about the administration of justice. And yesterday an appeals court heard those voices and it took another look and said justice was not done. Let me be clear, there is no excuse for the way the legal system treated those young people. This case reminds us that the scales of justice are seriously out of balance when it comes to charging, sentencing and punishing African Americans. And we cannot forget this is not over yet. There are still questions unanswered. The case in Jena cries out for a full investigation by the Department of Justice's civil rights division. And it reaffirms my conviction that the next president must have a justice department devoted to justice and a civil rights division that works for all Americans.

This case reminds us that we have so much work yet to do, America's long march to freedom, equality and opportunity has been marked by many milestones like the creation of the NAACP, or the Montgomery Bus boycott, the sit-ins at the Orangeburg lunch counter organized by a young Jim Clyburn, that fateful Sunday march across the Pettis Bridge in Selma, Alabama. But these milestones do not mark the end of the journey our country has been on. They are way stations along that journey; the march is not over. And Today, America needs the NAACP and its leadership as much as we ever have before.

I've been traveling across our country. I came today to be with you from California; I crisscrossed the country, from one coast to the other, from north to south, and I see the strength and the dynamism of our great nation. But I also hear the voices of so many Americans who are worried about our future. They're not sure of the direction we are headed and they ask with concern and even insecurity "What's next?"

They're aware that we have an income gap that has grown like a chasm in our country. Between the very very best off in America and all the rest of us, and it's a gap that is even greater between African Americans and white Americans. We have a health care gap. The access to health care is not even in our nation, we all know that. The rates for disease and the failure to treat those diseases is a disparity that we should not tolerate. We have an achievement gap between the rates of graduation and access to higher education, between the gleaming corridors of suburban schools and the deplorable conditions along the corridor of shame. And we have an investment gap when inner cities and rural America are left behind because we are failing to invest in either the physical infrastructure or the human potential. And indeed we even have a democracy gap right now in America. When some Americans, particularly people of color, have to wait at the polls for hours while others down the road or in the next town cast their votes within minutes, there's something wrong. And as we have seen, most recently, we have a justice gap.

Reverend Darby referred to the disparity in sentencing when it comes to cocaine. Well, that is just one of the disparities.15% of drug users in America are African American, but African Americans make up 53% of all drug offenders sent to prison. So how do we close all of these gaps? How do we move forward toward a more perfect union? Continue that progress that has been the hallmark but we cannot let it stop now. I start with my conviction that our families and communities, our churches and civic organizations, our states, and our country have to work together to help each child live up to his or her God-given potential. That, to me, is the rallying cry for America, but instead of tapping that potential and working to bring America together, too many Americans today feel as though they are invisible -- that their problems, their daily struggles, are not covered in the media, not the concern of people in public life or in the boardrooms of America, and indeed that they are being forgotten instead of enlisted in this great American commitment to a better future. Well, indeed that's what's happened in the last years. You know, we've had an attorney general who doesn't respect the rule of law or enforce the civil rights laws on the books. We've seen Supreme Court justices turn the clock back on Brown vs. Board of Education. Tax breaks have been given for drug companies ahead of health care for poor children. No-bid contracts given to Halliburton, while more than 60,000 people still live in trailers along the Gulf Coast. In short, we have seen the creation of a government that turns American values on their heads -- a government of the few, by the few, and for the few.

It breaks tradition because, for us, we want to believe that our government represents all of us, don't we? It's taken many years of struggle to get to that point. Most of us in this room tonight were not in our Constitution. It took a long time before we amended it to include, at least on paper, constitutional rights for us all. And to feel as though the clock is being turned back is unacceptable in our country.

This new vision of government that has been propagated in Washington, that Jim Clyburn and I have been fighting against, is called the ownership society. Well, the reality is they own it and want you to work for it. You're on your own is a better description. If you take the first letters of you're on your own, it spells yo-yo, and that's the way a lot of people feel, somebody else holding the string and moving it up and down.

Because if you are a child in a crumbling school along the corridor of shame, you are invisible. And if you're a young man caught in the brutal revolving door of low skills, no jobs, and a justice system stacked against you, you're invisible as well. If you're a mother without health care, a father without a job, a family that can't get by on the minimum wage, well, you're invisible, too. If you're a voter, turned away from the polls for no good reason or voting on a broken machine that doesn't even record your vote, you're invisible. And if you're stuck on a rooftop or stranded at the Super Dome during a hurricane, you're invisible to this president, even when you're on CNN.

Well, these people are not invisible to the NAACP, and they're not invisible to me, and they should never be invisible to the president of the United States. These stories and these concerns should be there on a daily basis in the Oval Office because when we're invisible to each other, we're not working together, we're not rolling up our sleeves and trying to solve problems, we're not seeing each other or listening, and we are the poorer for it.

We've got to get America back into the solutions business. When I was growing up, I believed that my country could do anything we set our minds to, and during my lifetime, I saw many examples of that. I saw a Supreme Court come down with the decision called Brown vs. Board of Education. I saw a president who sent in troops to make sure children could go to school in Little Rock, Arkansas. I heard a president say we'll send a man to the moon and bring him back safely before the end of the decade. I watched as a president signed civil rights laws and voting rights laws and Medicare and Medicaid to care for the poor and care for the elderly. Republican and democratic presidents alike kept moving us forward. We have been in the grip of a dangerous experiment in extremism the last six and a half years. It has been, it has been a repudiation of the bi-partisanship that together has moved our country. Jim quoted Abraham Lincoln, a great Republican president, and you could pick many others from both sides of the aisle. Our current president campaigned as a compassionate conservative and it turned out he was neither. And we have been paying a price, and this is not about partisanship, this is about being an American again. This is about caring that our country has these challenges and then working to overcome them. Now, all of you in Charleston know how important the ongoing struggle is, and I know later we'll have a chance to join hands and sing "we shall overcome." Well that story of that song speaks volumes about the power of working with one another and looking out for each other.

Sixty years ago the workers of the American Tobacco Company here in Charleston were on strike. These women sang a song on the picket line that many people had known as "I'll be alright" or "I'll overcome someday." But the women of Charleston sang it with a very important difference. "We" they sang "we will overcome someday." And your own Septima Clark would later help change the word "will" to "shall." And this version echoed across continents and generations, out of the mouths of protesters and the mouths of presidents. "I will overcome" was a fine song but "We shall overcome" moved mountains and changed the world and we need a President who will make that same change in our government -- the change from "I" to "we." We are all in this together, and it's time we make government work for all of us again. It's time that we make government a true partner not just with those who are already privileged but with every small town, every small hamlet, every group of people in our country.

I believe that one of the most important jobs of the next President is to define a new vision of prosperity and fairness for the 21st century -- a vision for how we restore prosperity for working and middle class Americans who are the heart and soul of this nation and how we can achieve the promise of our founding: that we are all created equal, endowed by our Creator with inalienable rights.

And here's what I believe. The foundation of a strong economy is the investments we make in each other -- in education, in health care, in jobs and housing. Sarah Ford talked about the problems we're having across America and the very great difficulty people are facing because of the mortgage crisis. We have so many middle class people who are hanging on and so many who used to be in the middle class falling back into poverty. During the 1990s we saw the creation of twenty two million new jobs and more people lifted out of poverty than at any time in our country's history. Last month we lost four thousand jobs in America and people are justifiably concerned about what will happen to their home, their health care, their job, their future.

Greatness has come in America from our recognition that it is not rich people who made America great -- it is the hardworking middle class and working people who made America great and continues to make us great.

We've got to get back to creating good jobs with rising wages and I'm convinced we can do that. We have to move back to fiscal responsibility. Six and a half years ago we had a balanced budget and a surplus. That has been squandered. The President has had two major goals of his presidency: tax breaks for the wealthiest and the War in Iraq. But he has not paid for either. He's put them on the credit card. The way he's funded them is to borrow money from the Social Security Trust Fund and borrow money from countries like China every single day. So we are in "hoc" as a nation. We're borrowing money even from Mexico.

We need to get back to a sense of responsibility in the federal government and then we've got to look at how we're going to create new jobs by a new energy plan that puts people to work in America by going ahead and combating global warming right here at home -- something important for coastal states like South Carolina. We need to rebuild our infrastructure and I think that if we had a jobs program based no energy, the environment, and infrastructure, we would put millions of Americans back to work again.

We need to provide a high quality education for every single child, and I want to have a universal pre-kindergarten program that is especially focused on children from disadvantaged backgrounds, I heard the Mayor talking about that. We know that if children get a good quality pre-school education, they stay in school, they do better, and the evidence is overwhelming that with a good quality pre-school program in our country we would cut by 50% the achievement gap between black and white youngsters by the time they graduated from high school.

We've got to make college affordable again and I want to brag on the Democratic congress particularly with our leader here, leader Clyburn, the Democratic congress has just passed legislation to lower interest rates and increase the amount of Pell Grants so we can get back to making college affordable again. And let's not forget all of the decent young people who don't go to college. Let's get more apprenticeship programs, more technical programs, they deserve our help to have a job that makes them competitive in the global economy.

I believe we can guarantee every single American quality, affordable health care. It is time. We have 47 million Americans without health insurance. But it's not just about insuring the uninsured although I believe that is a moral imperative. In some groups that I speak to some people come up to me afterwards and they say "I don't know anyone that's uninsured." I say "Well, go to an emergency room some night and sit in that emergency room and watch people come in because they have no where else to go." So it is a moral imperative that we come up with a health care plan to cover everyone, but it's not only that, we have to make sure that the people with insurance actually get taken care of because too many people with insurance when their doctor says they need a certain treatment, the insurance company says no. I have this problem all the time as a Senator. A man from Northern New York called me and said 'Senator, what have I done wrong, I've worked for the same employer for years. I've always paid my premiums. My family has always been healthy. Now my son has been diagnosed with a rare disease and the doctors say there's one place in the country where he should be treated and the insurance companies say they won't send him there." Or a mother from Long Island, NY calls and says her daughter has Leukemia and she needs a stem cell transplant but they have to have a donor and it's expensive to search for a donor and the insurance company won't pay for the search. So I get on the phone and my staff gets on the phone and we argue with the insurance companies and they're afraid that we'll embarrass them and so finally they say "fine, the boy can have his operation and we'll pay for the donor search". It should not take a United States Senator to get the health care that a mother and a father need for their sons and daughters.

On Monday I'll be releasing the third part of my health care plan, the first part is lowered costs for everybody. Premium costs have gone up 87% in the last six years, more and more employers can't afford to cover people. Insurance is getting more bare bones, so let's get costs down and let's improve quality and that includes emphasizing prevention. As Dot and I were walking in, there's a poster outside that says 25% of South Carolinians have heart disease. We stopped and starred at it. I was shocked at that high figure, Mayor. We've got to do more to help people keep themselves healthy.

We don't pay for prevention in America. If you are diabetic, a lot of insurance companies won't pay for you to have your feet checked or your eyes checked but if you have to have your foot amputated, they'll pay for the operation. That's just upside down and backwards. So we've got to get to a point where we are paying for prevention and then we have to cover everybody. I think the time has come because doctors, nurses, hospitals, employers, labor, everybody realizes we are losing jobs in the global economy because we don't have the health care system that can effectively deliver health care with high value at lower cost. But then we also have to restore competence to our government. Now I never thought that would be an applause line that you stand up and say "we got to get our government to be competent,' but after Katrina.

We have to end the no-bid contracts, we have to get rid of the cronyism in government and we have to get back to an old fashioned idea of appointing qualified people to the positions they hold in the United States Government. In particular, we've got to have a Justice Department that functions again. Today I released my agenda to restore and strengthen the civil rights mission of the Department of Justice. It is a five-point plan that will meet the challenges of this time. The first is to begin undoing the damage of the past years. I want an Attorney General who will conduct a thorough review and report back with recommendations on how to restore the Department's traditional role in enforcing civil rights and respecting the rule of law.

The Attorney General should also review charges of improper, politically motivated hiring and firing to determine whether laws have been broken. Remember it was Republican U.S Attorneys who really sounded the alarm about all the partisan activity going on in the Justice Department. We cannot have that, ladies and gentleman. We have to believe that justice is blind in America. And we have to fully fund the Civil Rights Division. We've got to get back to allowing local communities to look for ways to pursue integration and reduce racial inequality. The court's action in its recent case was a big setback to voluntary efforts that local communities had adopted themselves; nobody ordered them to, they decided what they wanted to do. And we've got to give some money and expertise to local communities to help them figure out how best to fulfill the meaning of the equal protection clause.

I want to lead a great effort to fight discrimination in the workplace. A recent study found a shocking fact. Employers were twice as likely to hire a white applicant with the very same qualifications as a black applicant. And even hired at a greater percentage, white applicants with criminal records over black applicants without one. Anyone who says that we have gotten beyond racial discrimination is not living with their eyes open. I believe we have to shine a bright light on any discrimination, whether it be against people of color or against women and make sure that we truly fulfill our laws, not just by the letter but by the spirit.

I also want to clean up our elections and I have introduced legislation to do that and we're attempting to get a bill through the Congress. We have to prosecute and punish deceptive practices, you've heard about them. People come out of church and there's a flier on the window, under the windshield wiper and it says you're supposed to vote on Wednesday not Tuesday. Or people pick up the phone and a voice says "we're just calling to inform you that if you're ever even had a traffic ticket you cannot vote." All kinds of deceptive practices. And then we've got the new challenge of the identification requirements, which are in many respects, discriminating against the poor, the elderly. I see that in New York, in New York City we have a lot of people that don't have a driver's license because they take the subway and now in order to be able to vote they have to produce something like a driver's license. So we've got to make sure that we are not disenfranchising Americans after having spent fifty years trying to extend the franchise to every single American. I would also like to see us modernize and strengthen our laws against hate crimes and generally reassert our belief that we are stronger when we respect and protect the rights of every single one of us.

And of course we must begin to end the war in Iraq and bring our troops home as quickly and responsibly as we can. The reality is this is a sectarian civil war --there is no military solution. Our young men and women who wear the uniform of our country have performed heroically and with great honor and dedication and they have done what they were asked to do. They were given a mission and they have fulfilled it. They were asked to get rid of Saddam Hussein and bring him to justice and they did. They were asked to give the Iraqis a chance for free and fair elections and they did as well and they were asked to give the Iraqi government the space and time to make the political decisions that only the Iraqis can make for themselves. So their mission has been completed. Unfortunately neither the Iraqi government, nor our government, have done what they needed to do politically and diplomatically to deal with the challenges in Iraq.

The people voted for change in November 2006. We have been fighting for change in the Congress. And I hope that the President will work with us to start bringing our troops home, engage in a very concerted effort to get the Iraqis to make the tough decisions they have to make and start a diplomatic process in the region and the world to try to bring more countries into the effort to stabilize Iraq going forward. But if the President does not end the war in Iraq, then the next President must. That has to be part of what happens as soon as possible. So I believe that America is ready for change and it's change that is part of the American character and experience.

You know, we believe in change. We are the people of the future. When you travel around the world as I've been privileged to do, it's striking how own in places near and far, they are looking backwards not forwards. When I was First Lady and I would represent our country and I would go to meetings with presidents and prime ministers and other dignitaries, often just as an ice breaker, I would say "so how are things going here in whatever country I was in." I cannot tell you how many times people started their answers by talking about something that happened 500 or 1000 years ago. "Well things are fine except, you know, if it hadn't been for that war 800 years ago, things would be a lot better."

We are the people of the future and we need to start acting like that again. There is no problem we face in the world that we cannot meet. If we decide as Americans we will do that. You cannot be a leader if no one is following and right now our country has to rebuild our standing and position in the world because there is no problem we face whether it be global terrorism or global warming or global epidemics that we can take on by ourselves. So it's important that we give back so that feeling of confidence and optimism that has marked our country over these long centuries of progress and hope.

When Jim was talking about my own life, I did start out as a young lawyer working for a native South Carolinian, Marion Wright Edelman at the Children's Defense Fund and I remember being so struck by how dedicated she and everyone working with her were to making it possible to change lives one at a time. I went door to door finding children who weren't in school because in those days, so many children were kept out of school if they had minor disabilities, if the had to take care of their siblings. And that was only 30 years ago. We had millions of children who weren't even going to school. And then we passed the Individuals with Disabilities in Education Act and we began to reach out to every single child. That's what I believe we do at our best. We reach out to one another. And I'm going to do everything I can; working with you to make the change happen that America is yearning for. I know it's not easy. There are lots of reasons why people would stop trying to get health care for everyone or trying to get a new energy policy that took the tax breaks away from the oil companies. If it were easy, anyone would do it. We do it because we are Americans. We can't let ourselves be stopped by the partisan bickering or the divisiveness or the enormity of the challenges we face. There are those who will say it can't be done. There always are. But as James Baldwin once noted, "those who say it can't be done are usually interrupted by others doing it." For nearly 100 years, the NAACP has been interrupting the nay-sayers; changing laws and changing lives. That's why I'm honored to be with you tonight and I'm honored to walk alongside you in the march for justice. I look forward to continuing that march in the months and years ahead. Because it leads to the destination that is America's destiny -- that more perfect union, that place where not only we look at one another and recognize those inalienable rights, but we work to make sure that every single child has a chance to live up to his or her god-given potential. And that Americas goodness and greatness is recognized across the world.

Thank you all and God bless you.

I am honored to be here tonight. A proud mother. A proud Democrat. A proud American. And a proud supporter of Barack Obama.
My friends, it is time to take back the country we love.

Whether you voted for me, or voted for Barack, the time is now to unite as a single party with a single purpose. We are on the same team, and none of us can sit on the sidelines.

This is a fight for the future. And it's a fight we must win.

I haven't spent the past 35 years in the trenches advocating for children, campaigning for universal health care, helping parents balance work and family, and fighting for women's rights at home and around the world . . . to see another Republican in the White House squander the promise of our country and the hopes of our people.

And you haven't worked so hard over the last 18 months, or endured the last eight years, to suffer through more failed leadership.

No way. No how. No McCain.

Barack Obama is my candidate. And he must be our President.

Tonight we need to remember what a Presidential election is really about. When the polls have closed, and the ads are finally off the air, it comes down to you -- the American people, your lives, and your children's futures.

For me, it's been a privilege to meet you in your homes, your workplaces, and your communities. Your stories reminded me everyday that America's greatness is bound up in the lives of the American people -- your hard work, your devotion to duty, your love for your children, and your determination to keep going, often in the face of enormous obstacles.

You taught me so much, you made me laugh, and . . . you even made me cry. You allowed me to become part of your lives. And you became part of mine.

I will always remember the single mom who had adopted two kids with autism, didn't have health insurance and discovered she had cancer. But she greeted me with her bald head painted with my name on it and asked me to fight for health care.

I will always remember the young man in a Marine Corps t-shirt who waited months for medical care and said to me: "Take care of my buddies; a lot of them are still over there....and then will you please help take care of me?"

I will always remember the boy who told me his mom worked for the minimum wage and that her employer had cut her hours. He said he just didn't know what his family was going to do.

I will always be grateful to everyone from all fifty states, Puerto Rico and the territories, who joined our campaign on behalf of all those people left out and left behind by the Bush Administrtation.

To my supporters, my champions -- my sisterhood of the traveling pantsuits - from the bottom of my heart: Thank you.

You never gave in. You never gave up. And together we made history.

Along the way, America lost two great Democratic champions who would have been here with us tonight. One of our finest young leaders, Arkansas Democratic Party Chair, Bill Gwatney, who believed with all his heart that America and the South could be and should be Democratic from top to bottom.

And Congresswoman Stephanie Tubbs Jones, a dear friend to many of us, a loving mother and courageous leader who never gave up her quest to make America fairer and smarter, stronger and better. Steadfast in her beliefs, a fighter of uncommon grace, she was an inspiration to me and to us all.

Our heart goes out to Stephanie's son, Mervyn, Jr, and Bill's wife, Rebecca, who traveled to Denver to join us at our convention.

Bill and Stephanie knew that after eight years of George Bush, people are hurting at home, and our standing has eroded around the world. We have a lot of work ahead.

Jobs lost, houses gone, falling wages, rising prices. The Supreme Court in a right-wing headlock and our government in partisan gridlock. The biggest deficit in our nation's history. Money borrowed from the Chinese to buy oil from the Saudis.

Putin and Georgia, Iraq and Iran.

I ran for President to renew the promise of America. To rebuild the middle class and sustain the American Dream, to provide the opportunity to work hard and have that work rewarded, to save for college, a home and retirement, to afford the gas and groceries and still have a little left over each month.

To promote a clean energy economy that will create millions of green collar jobs.

To create a health care system that is universal, high quality, and affordable so that parents no longer have to choose between care for themselves or their children or be stuck in dead end jobs simply to keep their insurance.

To create a world class education system and make college affordable again.

To fight for an America defined by deep and meaningful equality - from civil rights to labor rights, from women's rights to gay rights, from ending discrimination to promoting unionization to providing help for the most important job there is: caring for our families. To help every child live up to his or her God-given potential.

To make America once again a nation of immigrants and a nation of laws.

To bring fiscal sanity back to Washington and make our government an instrument of the public good, not of private plunder.

To restore America's standing in the world, to end the war in Iraq, bring our troops home and honor their service by caring for our veterans.

And to join with our allies to confront our shared challenges, from poverty and genocide to terrorism and global warming.

Most of all, I ran to stand up for all those who have been invisible to their government for eight long years.

Those are the reasons I ran for President. Those are the reasons I support Barack Obama. And those are the reasons you should too.

I want you to ask yourselves: Were you in this campaign just for me? Or were you in it for that young Marine and others like him? Were you in it for that mom struggling with cancer while raising her kids? Were you in it for that boy and his mom surviving on the minimum wage? Were you in it for all the people in this country who feel invisible?

We need leaders once again who can tap into that special blend of American confidence and optimism that has enabled generations before us to meet our toughest challenges. Leaders who can help us show ourselves and the world that with our ingenuity, creativity, and innovative spirit, there are no limits to what is possible in America.

This won't be easy. Progress never is. But it will be impossible if we don't fight to put a Democrat in the White House.

We need to elect Barack Obama because we need a President who understands that America can't compete in a global economy by padding the pockets of energy speculators, while ignoring the workers whose jobs have been shipped overseas. We need a President who understands that we can't solve the problems of global warming by giving windfall profits to the oil companies while ignoring opportunities to invest in new technologies that will build a green economy.

We need a President who understands that the genius of America has always depended on the strength and vitality of the middle class.

Barack Obama began his career fighting for workers displaced by the global economy. He built his campaign on a fundamental belief that change in this country must start from the ground up, not the top down. He knows government must be about "We the people" not "We the favored few."

And when Barack Obama is in the White House, he'll revitalize our economy, defend the working people of America, and meet the global challenges of our time. Democrats know how to do this. As I recall, President Clinton and the Democrats did it before. And President Obama and the Democrats will do it again.

He'll transform our energy agenda by creating millions of green jobs and building a new, clean energy future. He'll make sure that middle class families get the tax relief they deserve. And I can't wait to watch Barack Obama sign a health care plan into law that covers every single American.

Barack Obama will end the war in Iraq responsibly and bring our troops home - a first step to repairing our alliances around the world.

And he will have with him a terrific partner in Michelle Obama. Anyone who saw Michelle's speech last night knows she will be a great First Lady for America.

Americans are also fortunate that Joe Biden will be at Barack Obama's side. He is a strong leader and a good man. He understands both the economic stresses here at home and the strategic challenges abroad. He is pragmatic, tough, and wise. And, of course, Joe will be supported by his wonderful wife, Jill.

They will be a great team for our country.

Now, John McCain is my colleague and my friend.

He has served our country with honor and courage.

But we don't need four more years . . . of the last eight years.

More economic stagnation ...and less affordable health care.

More high gas prices ...and less alternative energy.

More jobs getting shipped overseas ...and fewer jobs created here.

More skyrocketing debt ...home foreclosures ...and mounting bills that are crushing our middle class families.

More war . . . less diplomacy.

More of a government where the privileged come first ...and everyone else comes last.

John McCain says the economy is fundamentally sound. John McCain doesn't think that 47 million people without health insurance is a crisis. John McCain wants to privatize Social Security. And in 2008, he still thinks it's okay when women don't earn equal pay for equal work.

With an agenda like that, it makes sense that George Bush and John McCain will be together next week in the Twin Cities. Because these days they're awfully hard to tell apart.

America is still around after 232 years because we have risen to the challenge of every new time, changing to be faithful to our values of equal opportunity for all and the common good.

And I know what that can mean for every man, woman, and child in America. I'm a United States Senator because in 1848 a group of courageous women and a few brave men gathered in Seneca Falls, New York, many traveling for days and nights, to participate in the first convention on women's rights in our history.

And so dawned a struggle for the right to vote that would last 72 years, handed down by mother to daughter to granddaughter - and a few sons and grandsons along the way.

These women and men looked into their daughters' eyes, imagined a fairer and freer world, and found the strength to fight. To rally and picket. To endure ridicule and harassment. To brave violence and jail.

And after so many decades - 88 years ago on this very day - the 19th amendment guaranteeing women the right to vote would be forever enshrined in our Constitution.

My mother was born before women could vote. But in this election my daughter got to vote for her mother for President.

This is the story of America. Of women and men who defy the odds and never give up.

How do we give this country back to them?

By following the example of a brave New Yorker , a woman who risked her life to shepherd slaves along the Underground Railroad.

And on that path to freedom, Harriett Tubman had one piece of advice.

If you hear the dogs, keep going.

If you see the torches in the woods, keep going.

If they're shouting after you, keep going.

Don't ever stop. Keep going.

If you want a taste of freedom, keep going.

Even in the darkest of moments, ordinary Americans have found the faith to keep going.

I've seen it in you. I've seen it in our teachers and firefighters, nurses and police officers, small business owners and union workers, the men and women of our military - you always keep going.

We are Americans. We're not big on quitting.

But remember, before we can keep going, we have to get going by electing Barack Obama president.

We don't have a moment to lose or a vote to spare.

Nothing less than the fate of our nation and the future of our children hang in the balance.

I want you to think about your children and grandchildren come election day. And think about the choices your parents and grandparents made that had such a big impact on your life and on the life of our nation.

We've got to ensure that the choice we make in this election honors the sacrifices of all who came before us, and will fill the lives of our children with possibility and hope.

That is our duty, to build that bright future, and to teach our children that in America there is no chasm too deep, no barrier too great - and no ceiling too high - for all who work hard, never back down, always keep going, have faith in God, in our country, and in each other.

Thank you so much. God bless America and Godspeed to you all.

Thank you so much. Thank you all.
Well, this isn't exactly the party I'd planned, but I sure like the company.

I want to start today by saying how grateful I am to all of you – to everyone who poured your hearts and your hopes into this campaign, who drove for miles and lined the streets waving homemade signs, who scrimped and saved to raise money, who knocked on doors and made calls, who talked and sometimes argued with your friends and neighbors, who emailed and contributed online, who invested so much in our common enterprise, to the moms and dads who came to our events, who lifted their little girls and little boys on their shoulders and whispered in their ears, "See, you can be anything you want to be."

To the young people like 13 year-old Ann Riddle from Mayfield, Ohio who had been saving for two years to go to Disney World, and decided to use her savings instead to travel to Pennsylvania with her Mom and volunteer there as well. To the veterans and the childhood friends, to New Yorkers and Arkansans who traveled across the country and telling anyone who would listen why you supported me.

To all those women in their 80s and their 90s born before women could vote who cast their votes for our campaign. I've told you before about Florence Steen of South Dakota, who was 88 years old, and insisted that her daughter bring an absentee ballot to her hospice bedside. Her daughter and a friend put an American flag behind her bed and helped her fill out the ballot. She passed away soon after, and under state law, her ballot didn't count. But her daughter later told a reporter, "My dad's an ornery old cowboy, and he didn't like it when he heard mom's vote wouldn't be counted. I don't think he had voted in 20 years. But he voted in place of my mom."

To all those who voted for me, and to whom I pledged my utmost, my commitment to you and to the progress we seek is unyielding. You have inspired and touched me with the stories of the joys and sorrows that make up the fabric of our lives and you have humbled me with your commitment to our country.

18 million of you from all walks of life – women and men, young and old, Latino and Asian, African-American and Caucasian, rich, poor and middle class, gay and straight – you have stood strong with me. And I will continue to stand strong with you, every time, every place, and every way that I can. The dreams we share are worth fighting for.

Remember - we fought for the single mom with a young daughter, juggling work and school, who told me, "I'm doing it all to better myself for her." We fought for the woman who grabbed my hand, and asked me, "What are you going to do to make sure I have health care?" and began to cry because even though she works three jobs, she can't afford insurance. We fought for the young man in the Marine Corps t-shirt who waited months for medical care and said, "Take care of my buddies over there and then, will you please help take care of me?" We fought for all those who've lost jobs and health care, who can't afford gas or groceries or college, who have felt invisible to their president these last seven years.

I entered this race because I have an old-fashioned conviction: that public service is about helping people solve their problems and live their dreams. I've had every opportunity and blessing in my own life – and I want the same for all Americans. Until that day comes, you will always find me on the front lines of democracy – fighting for the future.

The way to continue our fight now – to accomplish the goals for which we stand – is to take our energy, our passion, our strength and do all we can to help elect Barack Obama the next President of the United States.

Today, as I suspend my campaign, I congratulate him on the victory he has won and the extraordinary race he has run. I endorse him, and throw my full support behind him. And I ask all of you to join me in working as hard for Barack Obama as you have for me.

I have served in the Senate with him for four years. I have been in this campaign with him for 16 months. I have stood on the stage and gone toe-to-toe with him in 22 debates. I have had a front row seat to his candidacy, and I have seen his strength and determination, his grace and his grit.

In his own life, Barack Obama has lived the American Dream. As a community organizer, in the state senate, as a United States Senator - he has dedicated himself to ensuring the dream is realized. And in this campaign, he has inspired so many to become involved in the democratic process and invested in our common future.

Now when I started this race, I intended to win back the White House, and make sure we have a president who puts our country back on the path to peace, prosperity, and progress. And that's exactly what we're going to do by ensuring that Barack Obama walks through the doors of the Oval Office on January 20, 2009.

I understand that we all know this has been a tough fight. The Democratic Party is a family, and it's now time to restore the ties that bind us together and to come together around the ideals we share, the values we cherish, and the country we love.

We may have started on separate journeys – but today, our paths have merged. And we are all heading toward the same destination, united and more ready than ever to win in November and to turn our country around because so much is at stake.

We all want an economy that sustains the American Dream, the opportunity to work hard and have that work rewarded, to save for college, a home and retirement, to afford that gas and those groceries and still have a little left over at the end of the month. An economy that lifts all of our people and ensures that our prosperity is broadly distributed and shared.

We all want a health care system that is universal, high quality, and affordable so that parents no longer have to choose between care for themselves or their children or be stuck in dead end jobs simply to keep their insurance. This isn't just an issue for me – it is a passion and a cause – and it is a fight I will continue until every single American is insured – no exceptions, no excuses.

We all want an America defined by deep and meaningful equality – from civil rights to labor rights, from women's rights to gay rights, from ending discrimination to promoting unionization to providing help for the most important job there is: caring for our families.

We all want to restore America's standing in the world, to end the war in Iraq and once again lead by the power of our values, and to join with our allies to confront our shared challenges from poverty and genocide to terrorism and global warming.

You know, I've been involved in politics and public life in one way or another for four decades. During those forty years, our country has voted ten times for President. Democrats won only three of those times. And the man who won two of those elections is with us today.

We made tremendous progress during the 90s under a Democratic President, with a flourishing economy, and our leadership for peace and security respected around the world. Just think how much more progress we could have made over the past 40 years if we had a Democratic president. Think about the lost opportunities of these past seven years – on the environment and the economy, on health care and civil rights, on education, foreign policy and the Supreme Court. Imagine how far we could've come, how much we could've achieved if we had just had a Democrat in the White House.

We cannot let this moment slip away. We have come too far and accomplished too much.

Now the journey ahead will not be easy. Some will say we can't do it. That it's too hard. That we're just not up to the task. But for as long as America has existed, it has been the American way to reject "can't do" claims, and to choose instead to stretch the boundaries of the possible through hard work, determination, and a pioneering spirit.

It is this belief, this optimism, that Senator Obama and I share, and that has inspired so many millions of our supporters to make their voices heard.

So today, I am standing with Senator Obama to say: Yes we can.

Together we will work. We'll have to work hard to get universal health care. But on the day we live in an America where no child, no man, and no woman is without health insurance, we will live in a stronger America. That's why we need to help elect Barack Obama our President.

We'll have to work hard to get back to fiscal responsibility and a strong middle class. But on the day we live in an America whose middle class is thriving and growing again, where all Americans, no matter where they live or where their ancestors came from, can earn a decent living, we will live in a stronger America and that is why we must elect Barack Obama our President.

We'll have to work hard to foster the innovation that makes us energy independent and lift the threat of global warming from our children's future. But on the day we live in an America fueled by renewable energy, we will live in a stronger America. That's why we have to help elect Barack Obama our President.

We'll have to work hard to bring our troops home from Iraq, and get them the support they've earned by their service. But on the day we live in an America that's as loyal to our troops as they have been to us, we will live in a stronger America and that is why we must help elect Barack Obama our President.

This election is a turning point election and it is critical that we all understand what our choice really is. Will we go forward together or will we stall and slip backwards. Think how much progress we have already made. When we first started, people everywhere asked the same questions:

Could a woman really serve as Commander-in-Chief? Well, I think we answered that one.

And could an African American really be our President? Senator Obama has answered that one.

Together Senator Obama and I achieved milestones essential to our progress as a nation, part of our perpetual duty to form a more perfect union.

Now, on a personal note – when I was asked what it means to be a woman running for President, I always gave the same answer: that I was proud to be running as a woman but I was running because I thought I'd be the best President. But I am a woman, and like millions of women, I know there are still barriers and biases out there, often unconscious.

I want to build an America that respects and embraces the potential of every last one of us.

I ran as a daughter who benefited from opportunities my mother never dreamed of. I ran as a mother who worries about my daughter's future and a mother who wants to lead all children to brighter tomorrows. To build that future I see, we must make sure that women and men alike understand the struggles of their grandmothers and mothers, and that women enjoy equal opportunities, equal pay, and equal respect. Let us resolve and work toward achieving some very simple propositions: There are no acceptable limits and there are no acceptable prejudices in the twenty-first century.

You can be so proud that, from now on, it will be unremarkable for a woman to win primary state victories, unremarkable to have a woman in a close race to be our nominee, unremarkable to think that a woman can be the President of the United States. And that is truly remarkable.

To those who are disappointed that we couldn't go all the way – especially the young people who put so much into this campaign – it would break my heart if, in falling short of my goal, I in any way discouraged any of you from pursuing yours. Always aim high, work hard, and care deeply about what you believe in. When you stumble, keep faith. When you're knocked down, get right back up. And never listen to anyone who says you can't or shouldn't go on.

As we gather here today in this historic magnificent building, the 50th woman to leave this Earth is orbiting overhead. If we can blast 50 women into space, we will someday launch a woman into the White House.

Although we weren't able to shatter that highest, hardest glass ceiling this time, thanks to you, it's got about 18 million cracks in it. And the light is shining through like never before, filling us all with the hope and the sure knowledge that the path will be a little easier next time. That has always been the history of progress in America.

Think of the suffragists who gathered at Seneca Falls in 1848 and those who kept fighting until women could cast their votes. Think of the abolitionists who struggled and died to see the end of slavery. Think of the civil rights heroes and foot-soldiers who marched, protested and risked their lives to bring about the end to segregation and Jim Crow.

Because of them, I grew up taking for granted that women could vote. Because of them, my daughter grew up taking for granted that children of all colors could go to school together. Because of them, Barack Obama and I could wage a hard fought campaign for the Democratic nomination. Because of them, and because of you, children today will grow up taking for granted that an African American or a woman can yes, become President of the United States.

When that day arrives and a woman takes the oath of office as our President, we will all stand taller, proud of the values of our nation, proud that every little girl can dream and that her dreams can come true in America. And all of you will know that because of your passion and hard work you helped pave the way for that day.

So I want to say to my supporters, when you hear people saying – or think to yourself – "if only" or "what if," I say, "please don't go there." Every moment wasted looking back keeps us from moving forward.

Life is too short, time is too precious, and the stakes are too high to dwell on what might have been. We have to work together for what still can be. And that is why I will work my heart out to make sure that Senator Obama is our next President and I hope and pray that all of you will join me in that effort.

To my supporters and colleagues in Congress, to the governors and mayors, elected officials who stood with me, in good times and in bad, thank you for your strength and leadership. To my friends in our labor unions who stood strong every step of the way – I thank you and pledge my support to you. To my friends, from every stage of my life – your love and ongoing commitments sustain me every single day. To my family – especially Bill and Chelsea and my mother, you mean the world to me and I thank you for all you have done. And to my extraordinary staff, volunteers and supporters, thank you for working those long, hard hours. Thank you for dropping everything – leaving work or school – traveling to places you'd never been, sometimes for months on end. And thanks to your families as well because your sacrifice was theirs too.

All of you were there for me every step of the way. Being human, we are imperfect. That's why we need each other. To catch each other when we falter. To encourage each other when we lose heart. Some may lead; others may follow; but none of us can go it alone. The changes we're working for are changes that we can only accomplish together. Life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness are rights that belong to each of us as individuals. But our lives, our freedom, our happiness, are best enjoyed, best protected, and best advanced when we do work together.

That is what we will do now as we join forces with Senator Obama and his campaign. We will make history together as we write the next chapter in America's story. We will stand united for the values we hold dear, for the vision of progress we share, and for the country we love. There is nothing more American than that.

And looking out at you today, I have never felt so blessed. The challenges that I have faced in this campaign are nothing compared to those that millions of Americans face every day in their own lives. So today, I'm going to count my blessings and keep on going. I'm going to keep doing what I was doing long before the cameras ever showed up and what I'll be doing long after they're gone: Working to give every American the same opportunities I had, and working to ensure that every child has the chance to grow up and achieve his or her God-given potential.

I will do it with a heart filled with gratitude, with a deep and abiding love for our country– and with nothing but optimism and confidence for the days ahead. This is now our time to do all that we can to make sure that in this election we add another Democratic president to that very small list of the last 40 years and that we take back our country and once again move with progress and commitment to the future.

Thank you all and God bless you and God bless America.

Thank you all very, very much. Thank you. It is wonderful being here with all of you, among so many friends and I feel like this is a giant family reunion. The largest AIPAC gathering in history and I feel like I am among family and thank you for the warm welcome. I want to thank my friend, Lonny Kaplan, for his leadership and that introduction. I also want to thank Howard Friedman for his leadership as president and to congratulate David Victor on his election. I want to commend Howard Kohr, AIPAC's distinguished board of directors, and all of the AIPAC staff who work so hard every day all year round. And I particularly want to acknowledge the many students in the audience from around the country, the future of AIPAC and the U.S.-Israel relationship. I want to pay tribute to one member of the AIPAC family and my very good friend who is not with us this year, Congressman Tom Lantos. Tom bore witness to the worst of human cruelty and devoted his life to stopping it. He taught us to stand up for what's right, even when it's hard, especially when it's hard. And we will always cherish his memory and his wonderful family will always be in our hearts. And finally, I want to thank all of you for coming to Washington, D.C., once again to stand strong with Israel and to strengthen that special bond between our countries. Being here today, I am reminded of a passage in Isaiah: "Upon your walls, O Jerusalem, I have posted sentinels; all day and all night, they shall never be silent." Just like the sentinels of old, you are never silent, you never grow weary and you never stop standing up for and fighting for Israel.
Now, I know that there are some who say you shouldn't be here, who say speaking up for a strong, American-Israeli relationship is somehow at odds with America's interests. Well, I believe that speaking up for a strong American-Israeli relationship is essential to our interests. And I reject that our common commitment to Israel's survival and well-being is not in the best interests of the United States of America. I think you not only have a right to stand up for what you believe in, you have a responsibility as Americans to do so. You are acting in the highest American tradition, exercising a right enshrined in our constitution - the right to petition your government. And I applaud you for it.

Of course, I am privileged to represent one of the largest Jewish constituencies in the world. Is there anyone from New York even here in this audience today? I know you will be talking to your Members of Congress this week, but you won't need to ask me where I stand, because you already know the answer. I stand with you and for you. v

The United States and Israel have an incredible bond, as allies, friends, as partners. We have shared interests. We have shared ideals. These are not just common values. They are our core values: freedom, democracy, and human rights, women's rights, a robust civil society. And we stand with Israel, because Israel demonstrates that democracy can flourish in the most difficult conditions, because its very existence is a stinging rebuke to hatred and the holocaust, because in defeating terror Israel's cause is our cause, and because Israel's struggle is a struggle not just for the Jewish people but for all people who want to live in peace and security under a democratically elected government.

President Harry Truman certainly understood the importance of Israel. He recognized the new nation just 11 minutes after David Ben-Gurion read the proclamation of independence. So it is with joy and some sense of relief that we celebrate the 60th anniversary of that day. And for all of the trials and tears, what a remarkable 60 years it has been. From my first trip to Israel in 1982 to my most recent, I have seen firsthand what Israel has achieved - the desert is blooming again. And we can be so proud of the role that America has played in this success. Every American president since Truman recognized the special relationship and has made it stronger. Israel is stronger because of us and because of you.

But even as we celebrate these achievements, we know the work is far from over. Israel is not yet safe. The values that Israel represents are not yet secure. Our hearts go out in particular to the courageous citizens of cities like Sderot and Ashkelon who live in fear that a rocket will fall on their homes or their children's schools at any moment. I have seen these security challenges firsthand. In 2002, I went to the Sbarro Pizzeria with then President Olmert just a few weeks after that tragic suicide bombing there. I visited with victims of terrorism in the Hadassah Hospital. I have been to Gilo and seen the security fence protecting Israeli families from attacks in their own homes. I have stood up and have spoken out for their right to have that protective fence.

As a senator from New York, who has talked way too much, I have seen the tragic toll of terrorism on 9/11 here at home as well. My support for Israel does not come recently or lightly. I know it is right in my head, in my heart and in my gut. And that is exactly the commitment we need in our next president - a Democratic president, because the Democratic Party's strong commitment to the state of Israel since the days of Harry Truman endures today. It is one of our party's most cherished values and it will continue under the next Democratic president.

I know Senator Obama understands what it is at stake here. It has been an honor to contest these primaries with him. It is an honor to call him my friend. And let me be very clear: I know that Senator Obama will be a good friend to Israel. I know that Senator Obama shares my view that the next president must be ready to say to the world: America's position is unchanging, our resolve unyielding, our stance nonnegotiable. The United States stands with Israel, now and forever.

Let me underscore that I believe we need a Democrat in the White House next January because it is not just Israel that faces challenges in the 21st century, America does, too. The next president will inherit grave problems, difficult threats - a war in Afghanistan and a war in Iraq, America's reputation at an all-time low, the continued threat of terrorism at home and abroad. President Bush has moved us in the wrong direction. For all the strong rhetoric you heard from Senator McCain on Monday, he will continue the same failed policies in Iraq and weaken our security, making the Middle East a more dangerous place. America needs a new beginning in our foreign policy to make our country stronger and, frankly, to make our position in the world more credible, to give us the strategic leverage back that we have lost over the last seven years. We cannot stand strongly with Israel if we are not strong at home and if we are not respected and considered strong and the leader of the world everywhere else.

We have a rare moment of opportunity to change America's course and restore our standing in the world. We must seize this moment by leading our friends and allies in building the world we want rather than simply defending against a world we fear. We must build a world that will be safer, more prosperous, and more just. I believe security and opportunity go hand-in-hand. When children have hope, a real belief that there is opportunity ahead for them, we help to dry up the swamp of fear and pessimism that breeds terrorism. That means supporting education, not just for boys but for girls too. It also means that real economic opportunity can't grow where there is no security. And that opportunity alone is not enough to overcome extremism.

I have been very specific about how I would make this new foreign policy vision that I share, and I think many of you do as well, a reality. Today I want to lay out three principles that I hope will guide us in all that we do with Israel and why it is important to put that relationship into the broader context of what foreign policy is in the best interests of the United States.

First, I have a bedrock commitment to Israel's security because Israel's security is critical to our security. When Islamic extremists, including the leaders of nations, proclaim death to America, death to Israel, we understand that our two nations are fighting a shared threat. Those of us in this room know this bond is so much more personal than any security agreement or risk assessment. We know a shared threat can also mean shared sorrow. When eight young men were killed in a Jerusalem yeshiva in March including a 16-year-old American named Abraham David Moses, we reunited in our grief. So, I strongly support Israel's right to self-defense. Israel has both the right and the obligation to defend its citizens and I believe America should aid in that defense.

I am proud to support the $2.5 billion in security assistance for Israel and the Foreign Aid Bill and I am committed in making sure that Israel maintains a military edge to meet increasing threats. Part of our commit Israel's security is a commitment to the Israeli-Palestinian peace process. I am deeply moved by the legacies of so many leaders who have sacrificed so much in the quest for peace, like my friend Yitzhak Rabin, and the warrior, Ariel Sharon, who is in our thoughts and prayers.

We must support Israel and in making the tough choices for peace. I believe that U.S. diplomacy is critical to making progress and consistent U.S. involvement can lower the level of violence and restore our credibility in the region. We need to talk to all sides but all parties must know we will always stand with Israel in its struggle for peace and security. Israel should know that the United States will never pressure her to make unilateral concessions or to impose a made-in-America solution. Palestinians will need to do their part by renouncing violence and teaching their children the ways of peace and tolerance. We must show Palestinians and moderate Arabs that the path of reconciliation is better than the terrorist road to self-destruction.

I am deeply concerned about the growing threat in Gaza. Hamas has built a military force equipped with sophisticated weapons from Iran. Hamas' campaign of terror has claimed the lives of hundreds of innocent Israelis. Its charter calls for the destruction of Israel. It has shown no commitment to peace or to renouncing violence. So, we must be clear about how we feel about our next president negotiating directly with Hamas. Here is how I feel: until Hamas renouncing terrorism and recognizes Israel, negotiating with Hamas is unacceptable for the United States.

We must continue to demand a return of the Israeli soldiers captured by Hamas and by Hezbollah - Ehud Goldwasser, Eldad Regev, Gilad Shalit. I have been privileged to know Karnit Goldwasser, Ehud's wife and I was proud to sponsor the resolution that passed the Senate calling for their immediate release. I will not stop fighting and pressing for these soldiers to come home until they finally are safely home with the families that are waiting for them.

The second principle is a simple one: no nuclear weapons for Iran. Iran is a country whose leaders, whose president denies the Holocaust. He defies the international community. His government trains, funds, and arms Hamas and Hezbollah terrorists in attacking Israeli civilians. He threatens to destroy Israel. Just this week, he said that Israel is about to die and will soon be erased. We can never let Iran obtain nuclear weapons. The next president will have to deal with the Iranian challenge from day one. This is not just in Israel's interests. It is in America's interests and the world's interests, and this is a threat that I take very seriously. I'm a co-sponsor the Iran Nonproliferation Act. I support calling the Iranian Revolutionary Guard what it is: a terrorist organization. I have also said that should Iran ever, ever contemplate using nuclear weapons against Israel, they must understand what the consequences will be to them. But we must do everything in our power to prevent such an unthinkable day from ever happening and the best way to do that is to stop Iran from getting nuclear weapons in the first place.

We should start by developing an international consensus against Iran's nuclear program with a set of tougher sanctions if Iran continues to defy the international community. We should also work with Israel and moderate Arab neighbors to roll back Iran's influence in that region. If the Iranian government wants to become a responsible member of the international community, we would wholeheartedly welcome that change but Iran simply cannot be allowed to continue its current behavior and I wish to underscore I believe that we are further behind in constraining Iran today because of the failed policies of President Bush than we would have been had we taken a much more aggressive engagement course earlier. That is why it is imperative that we get both tough and smart about dealing with Iran before it is too late.

Now my third principle is standing up against hatred and anti-Semitism wherever it is found and it is not only Israelis and Jews who need to be speaking out against anti-Semitism, it is every fair-thinking person who understands that it directly affects you as well.

I have spoken out for years against anti-Semitism in Palestinian schools. I am appalled, still today, the Palestinian textbooks reject Israel's right to exist and describe Israel's founding as a catastrophe that's unprecedented in history. That is not education, it is indoctrination. We also know that the Saudis have textbooks describing Jews as wicked and we were all revolted when Iran's President held a conference to deny the holocaust, but our vigilance against anti-Semitism must go beyond the Middle East. It must receive no quarter anywhere in the world.

The next president will face a test of resolve on this issue, at the 2009 Durban Conference, also called the Durban II. I will never forget how the world's first conference against racism became a mockery of itself when it descended into anti-Semitism and hatred. The debacle at Durban must never be repeated. We should take very strong action to ensure anti-Semitism is kept off the agenda at Durban II and if those efforts fail, I believe that the United States should boycott that conference.

The challenge of fighting anti-Semitism is indeed great, but we know it is possible to change hearts and minds. We saw it recently when Magen David Adom was finally included in the international Red Cross after years of being singled out for being Israeli. On one of my trips to Israel, I met an MDA member named Natan, an Ethiopian Jew who had saved many innocent lives when he tackled a terrorist carrying explosives. It was a miracle that Natan had survived. His valor was extraordinary and it was just what you would expect from a member of the MDA. That's why I was so proud to take up the MDA's cause, sponsoring legislation and speaking out. And I was very pleased as all of us were when the International Red Cross righted this historic wrong. On a personal level, I was honored when Natan accepted my invitation to come to New York and walk with me in our Salute to Israel parade. In a way we are still walking together and the image of this very dignified Ethiopian Jew, now an Israeli, walking in that parade down Fifth Avenue, bearing the scars of his heroic rescue effort to prevent the terrorists from destroying more lives, was one I will carry with me my entire life because that was really Israel. It wasn't just everyone on the sides of the streets waving. It was this proud young man who had kept Jewish traditions alive and as a long string of those for centuries who had done so and who had finally come home to Israel and had given so much to protect the country that had given him a new life.

So while it can be easy to be discouraged when we look at the challenges ahead, we can never lose our resolve and never give up hope. What gives me not just hope but the underlying reality that can be delivered by those who work together, is that the power of the values we share with Israel are such an unshakable and unbreakable bond, and the difference that America can make is so critical.

Let me leave you with just in glimpse of why America matters and why AIPAC matters. In her memoir, one of my personal heroines, Golda Meir, wrote about the wonderful moment, 60 years ago, when Israel joined the family of nations and America stood at her side. Here is what she wrote: "a few minutes after midnight, my phone rang. It had been ringing all evening and as I ran to answer it, I wondered what bad news I would hear now." Doesn't that sound familiar? "But the voice at the other end of the phone sounded jubilant. 'Golda, are you listening? Truman has recognized us.' I can remember what I said or did but I remember how I felt. It was like a miracle and I was filled with joy and relief." That was the decision that one American president made, to be there for Israel at a time of need. That is the decision that the next president must be ready to make as well. To the members of AIPAC, just know your cause is just, your voice is strong. Washington and the world is listening. So go forth and speak up for what you know is right.

Thank you. God bless you. God bless Israel and God bless America. Thank you all very much.

Thank you. Thank you so much. Thank you all so much. Thank you, and thanks so much to South Dakota. You had the last word in this primary season, and it was worth the wait.
(APPLAUSE)

I want to start tonight by congratulating Senator Obama and his supporters on the extraordinary race that they have run.

Senator Obama has inspired so many Americans to care about politics and empowered so many more to get involved. And our party and our democracy is stronger and more vibrant as a result. So we are grateful.

(APPLAUSE)

And it has been an honor to contest these primaries with him, just as it is an honor to call him my friend. And, tonight, I would like all of us to take a moment to recognize him and his supporters for all they have accomplished.

(APPLAUSE)

Now, 16 months ago, you and I began a journey to make history and to remake America. And from the hills of New Hampshire to the hollows of West Virginia and Kentucky, from the fields of California to the factories of Ohio, from the Alleghenies to the Ozarks to the Everglades, to right here in the great state of New York, we...

(APPLAUSE)

We saw millions of Americans registering to vote for the first time, raising money for the first time, knocking on doors, making calls, talking to their friends and neighbors, mothers and fathers lifting their little girls and their little boys onto their shoulders and whispering, "See, you can be anything you want to be."

AUDIENCE: Hillary! Hillary! Hillary! Hillary! Hillary! Hillary! Hillary!

(APPLAUSE)

MRS. CLINTON: And I think, too, of all those...

AUDIENCE: Hillary! Hillary! Hillary!

MRS. CLINTON: ... all those wonderful women in their 90s who came out to see me, because they were born before women could vote, and they wanted to be part of making history, and the people who drove for miles, who waved their handmade signs, who went to all the events that we held, who came to HillaryClinton.com and showed the tangible support that they felt in their hearts.

And I am just enormously grateful, because, in the millions of quiet moments, in thousands of places, you asked yourself a simple question: Who will be the strongest candidate and the strongest...

(APPLAUSE)

Who will be ready to take back the White House and take charge as commander-in-chief and lead our country to better tomorrows?

People in all 50 states, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, and the territories, all had a chance to make your voices heard. And on election day after election day, you came out in record numbers to cast your ballots. Nearly 18 million of you cast your votes...

(APPLAUSE)

... for our campaign, carrying the popular vote with more votes than any primary candidate in history.

(APPLAUSE)

Even when the pundits and the naysayers proclaimed week after week that this race was over, you kept on voting. You're the nurse on the second shift, the worker on the line, the waitress on her feet, the small business owner, the farmer, the teacher, the miner, the trucker, the soldier, the veteran, the student, the hard-working men and women who don't always make the headlines, but have always written America's story.

You have voted because you wanted to take back the White House. And because of you...

(APPLAUSE)

... we won, together, the swing states necessary to get to 270 electoral votes.

(APPLAUSE)

And you know...

AUDIENCE: Yes, she will! Yes, she will! Yes, she will! Yes, she will! Yes, she will! Yes, she will!

MRS. CLINTON: In all of the states, you voted because you wanted a leader who will stand up for the deepest values of our party, a party that believes everyone should have a fair shot at the American dream, a party that cherishes every child, values every family, and counts every single vote.

(APPLAUSE)

I often felt that each of your votes was a prayer for our nation, a declaration of your dreams for your children, a reflection of your desire to chart a new course in this new century. And, in the end, while this primary was long, I am so proud we stayed the course together.

(APPLAUSE)

Because we stood our ground, it meant that every single United States citizen had a chance to make his or her voice heard. A record 35 million people voted in this primary...

(APPLAUSE)

... from every state, red, blue, purple, people of every age, faith, color, and walk of life. And we have brought so many people into the Democratic Party and created enthusiasm among those we seek to serve.

And I am committed to uniting our party so we move forward stronger and more ready than ever to take back the White House this November.

(APPLAUSE)

You know, for the past seven years, so many people in this country have felt invisible, like your president didn't even really see you. I have seen the shuttered factories, the jobs shipped overseas, the families struggling to afford gas and groceries.

But I've also seen unions re-training workers to build energy- efficient buildings, innovators designing cars that run on fuel cells and biofuels and electricity, cars that get more miles per gallon than ever before, cars that will cut the cost of driving, reduce our reliance on foreign oil, and fight global warming.

(APPLAUSE)

I have met too many people without health care, just a diagnosis away from financial ruin. But I've also seen the scientists and researchers solving the medical mysteries and finding the treatments and cures that are transforming lives.

I've seen the struggling schools with the crumbling classrooms and the unfair burdens imposed by No Child Left Behind. But I have also met dedicated and caring teachers who use their own savings to buy supplies and students passionately engaged in the issues of our time, from ending the genocide in Darfur to once again making the environment a central issue of our day.

(APPLAUSE)

None of you, none of you is invisible to me. You never have been.

(APPLAUSE)

I see you, and I know how hard-working you are. I've been fighting for you my whole adult life, and I will keep standing for you and working for you every single day.

Because in your courage and character, your energy and ingenuity, your compassion and faith, I see the promise of America every day. The challenges we face are great, but our determination is greater.

You know, I understand that that a lot of people are asking, "What does Hillary want? What does she want?"

Well, I want what I have always fought for in this whole campaign. I want to end the war in Iraq.

(APPLAUSE)

I want to turn this economy around. I want health care for every American. I want every child to live up to his or her God-given potential. And I want the nearly 18 million Americans who voted for me to be respected, to be heard, and no longer to be invisible.

(APPLAUSE)

You see, I have an old-fashioned notion, one that's been the basis of my candidacy and my life's work, that public service is about helping people solve their problems and live their own dreams. This nation has given me every opportunity, and that's what I want for every single American.

(APPLAUSE)

That's why I want universal health care. It is wrong...

(APPLAUSE)

... that Americans pay 50 percent more for health care than the people of any other wealthy nation, with costs doubling this decade, and nearly 50 million people without any health insurance at all.

It is wrong for parents to have to choose between care for themselves or their children, to be stuck in dead-end jobs just to keep their insurance, or to give up working altogether so their kids will qualify for Medicaid.

I've been working on this issue not just for the past 16 months, but for 16 years. And it is a fight...

(APPLAUSE)

It is a fight I will continue until every single American has health insurance, no exceptions and no excuses.

I want an economy that works for all families. That's why I've been fighting to create millions of new jobs in clean energy and rebuilding our infrastructure, jobs to come to all of our states, and urban and rural areas, and suburban communities and small towns.

And that's why I sounded the alarm on the home mortgage crisis well over a year ago...

(APPLAUSE)

... because these are the issues that will determine whether we will once again grow together as a nation or continue to grow apart.

And I want to restore America's leadership in the world. I want us to be led once again by the power of our values, to have a foreign policy that is both strong and smart, to join with our allies and confront our shared challenges, from poverty and genocide to global terrorism and global warming.

These are the issues that brought me into this race. They are the lifeblood of my campaign. And they have been and will continue to be the causes of my life. And your spirit... (APPLAUSE)

... your spirit has inspired me every day in this race. While I traveled our country, talking about how I wanted to help you, time and again you reached out to help me, to grab my hand or grip my arm, to look into my eyes and tell me, "Don't quit. Keep fighting. Stay in this race."

(APPLAUSE)

Now, there were days...

(APPLAUSE)

... when I had the strength -- there were the days when I had the strength enough to fight for all of us. And on the days that I didn't, I leaned on you, the soldier on his third tour of duty in Iraq who told his wife, an Iraqi veteran herself, to take his spending money and donate it to our campaign instead...

(APPLAUSE)

... the 11-year-old boy in Kentucky, who sold his bike and video games to raise money for our campaign, the woman who came to a rally hours early, waited and waited to give me a rosary, and all those who whispered to me, simply to say, "I am praying for you."

So many people said this race was over five months ago in Iowa, but we had faith in each other. And you brought me back in New Hampshire, and on Super Tuesday, and in Ohio, and in Pennsylvania, and Texas, and Indiana, West Virginia, Kentucky, Puerto Rico, and South Dakota.

(APPLAUSE)

I will carry your stories and your dreams with me every day for the rest of my life.

Now, the question is: Where do we go from here? And given how far we've come and where we need to go as a party, it's a question I don't take lightly. This has been a long campaign, and I will be making no decisions tonight.

(APPLAUSE)

But this has always been your campaign. So, to the 18 million people who voted for me, and to our many other supporters out there of all ages, I want to hear from you. I hope you'll go to my Web site at HillaryClinton.com and share your thoughts with me and help in any way that you can.

And in the coming days, I'll be consulting with supporters and party leaders to determine how to move forward with the best interests of our party and our country guiding my way.

And I want... (APPLAUSE)

I want to conclude tonight by saying, "Thank you." Thank you to the people across America for welcoming me and my family into your homes and your hearts.

Thanks to all of you in every corner of this country who cast your votes for our campaign. I am honored and humbled by your support and your trust.

Thanks to my staff and volunteers for all those long hours and late nights.

(APPLAUSE)

And I thank your families and your loved ones, as well, because your sacrifice was theirs.

And I especially want to thank all of the leadership of my campaign, our chairman, Terry McAuliffe, and everyone who worked so hard.

(APPLAUSE)

And, of course, my family, for their incredible love, support, and work, Bill and Chelsea...

(APPLAUSE)

... Hugh and Maria, Tony and Megan, Zach and Fiona, and my mother, who turns 89 tomorrow.

(APPLAUSE)

And, finally, I want to thank all of the people who had the courage to share your stories with me out on the campaign trail.

Tonight, I am thinking of a woman I met just yesterday in Rapid City, South Dakota. We were outside Tally's Restaurant. There was a crowd there as I was walking into the restaurant, and she was standing right up against the barrier.

She grabbed my hand, and she said, "What are you going to do to make sure I have health care?" And as she was talking, she began to cry. She told me she works three jobs; she has suffered from seizures since childhood; she hasn't been able to afford insurance ever since she left her parents' home.

It is shameful that anyone in this country could tell that story to me.

(APPLAUSE)

And whatever path I travel next, I promise I will keep faith with her and with everyone I met across this great and good country. You know, tonight, we stand just a few miles from the Statue of Liberty and from the site where the Twin Towers fell and where America rose again.

Lady Liberty's presence and the towers' absence are a constant reminder that here in America we are resilient, we are courageous, we embrace all of our people, and that, when we face our challenges together, there is no barrier we can't overcome, no dream we can't realize, nothing we can't do if we just start acting like Americans again.

Thank you all very much. God bless you, and God bless America.

The stakes in this election are so high: with two wars abroad, our economy in crisis here at home, and so many families struggling across America, the need for new leadership has never been greater.

At this point, we do not yet have a nominee - and when the last votes are cast on June 3, neither Senator Obama nor I will have secured the nomination. It will be up to automatic delegates like you to help choose our party's nominee, and I would like to tell you why I believe I am the stronger candidate against Senator McCain and would be the best President and Commander in Chief.

Voters in every state have made it clear that they want to be heard and counted as part of this historic race. And as we reach the end of the primary season, more than 17 million people have supported me in my effort to become the Democratic nominee - more people than have ever voted for a potential nominee in the history of our party. In the past two weeks alone, record numbers of voters participated in the West Virginia and Kentucky primaries. And with 40 and 35 point margins of victory, it is clear that even when voters are repeatedly told this race is over, they're not giving up on me - and I am not giving up on them either.

After seven years of feeling invisible to the Bush administration, Americans are seeking a President who is strong, experienced, and ready to take on our toughest challenges, from serving as Commander in Chief and ending the war in Iraq to turning our economy around. They want a President who shares their core beliefs about our country and its future and "gets" what they go through every day to care for their families, pay the bills and try to put something away for the future.

We simply cannot afford another four - or eight - years in the wilderness. That is why, everywhere I go, people come up to me, grip my hand or arm, and urge me to keep on running. That is why I continue in this race: because I believe I am best prepared to lead this country as President - and best prepared to put together a broad coalition of voters to break the lock Republicans have had on the electoral map and beat Senator McCain in November.

Recent polls and election results show a clear trend: I am ahead in states that have been critical to victory in the past two elections. From Ohio, to Pennsylvania, to West Virginia and beyond, the results of recent primaries in battleground states show that I have strong support from the regions and demographics Democrats need to take back the White House. I am also currently ahead of Senator McCain in Gallup national tracking polls, while Senator Obama is behind him. And nearly all independent analyses show that I am in a stronger position to win the Electoral College, primarily because I lead Senator McCain in Florida and Ohio. I've enclosed a detailed analysis of recent electoral and polling information, and I hope you will take some time to review it carefully.

In addition, when the primaries are finished, I expect to lead in the popular vote and in delegates earned through primaries. Ultimately, the point of our primary process is to pick our strongest nominee - the one who would be the best President and Commander in Chief, who has the greatest support from members of our party, and who is most likely to win in November. So I hope you will consider not just the strength of the coalition backing me, but also that more people will have cast their votes for me.

I am in this race for them -- for all the men and women I meet who wake up every day and work hard to make a difference for their families. People who deserve a shot at the American dream - the chance to save for college, a home and retirement; to afford quality health care for their families; to fill the gas tank and buy the groceries with a little left over each month.

I am in this race for all the women in their nineties who've told me they were born before women could vote, and they want to live to see a woman in the White House. For all the women who are energized for the first time, and voting for the first time. For the little girls - and little boys - whose parents lift them onto their shoulders at our rallies, and whisper in their ears, "See, you can be anything you want to be." As the first woman ever to be in this position, I believe I have a responsibility to them.

Finally, I am in this race because I believe staying in this race will help unite the Democratic Party. I believe that if Senator Obama and I both make our case - and all Democrats have the chance to make their voices heard - everyone will be more likely to rally around the nominee.

In the end, I am committed to unifying this party. What Senator Obama and I share is so much greater than our differences; and no matter who wins this nomination, I will do everything I can to bring us together and move us forward.

But at this point, neither of us has crossed the finish line. I hope that in the time remaining, you will think hard about which candidate has the best chance to lead our party to victory in November. I hope you will consider the results of the recent primaries and what they tell us about the mindset of voters in the key battleground states. I hope you will think about the broad and winning coalition of voters I have built. And most important, I hope you will think about who is ready to stand on that stage with Senator McCain, fight for the deepest principles of our party, and lead our country forward into this new century.

Thank you so much. Thank you all. Thank you. Thank you very, very much. Oh, thank you.
It's a long road to 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue and it runs right through the heart of Pennsylvania.

For six weeks Senator Obama and I have crisscrossed this state, meeting people up close, being judged side by side, making our best case. You listened and today you chose.

With two wars abroad and an economic crisis here at home, you know the stakes are high and the challenges are great, but you also know the possibilities. Those possibilities are endless, if we roll up our sleeves and get to work with a president who is ready to lead on day one.

That means ready to take charge as Commander-in-Chief and make this economy work for middle class families. And I thank you. I thank you, Pennsylvania, for deciding I can be that president.

For me, the victory we share tonight is deeply personal. It was here in Pennsylvania where my grandfather started work as a boy in the lace mills and ended up as a supervisor five decades later. It was here where my father attended college and played football for Penn State. And I am back here tonight because of their hard work and sacrifice. And I only wish they could have lived to see this moment, because in this election I carry with me not just their dreams, but the dreams of people like them and like you all across our country - people who embrace hard work and opportunity, who never waver in the face of adversity, who stand for what you believe and never stop believing in the promise of America.

I'm in this race to fight for you, to fight for everyone who has ever been counted out, for everyone fighting to pay the grocery bills or the medical bills, the credit card and mortgage payments, and the outrageous price of gas at the pump today.

You know, the pundit's question whether Pennsylvanians would trust me with this charge and tonight you showed you do. You know you can count on me to stand up strong for you every single day in the White House.

This has been a historic race and I commend Senator Obama and his supporters tonight. We are, in many ways, all on this journey together to create an America that embraces every last one of us. The women in their nineties who tell me they were born before women could vote and they're hopeful of seeing a woman in the White House. The mothers and fathers at my events, who lift their little girls on their shoulders and whisper in their ears, "see, you can be anything you want."

Tonight, more than ever, I need your help to continue this journey. This is your campaign and this is your victory tonight. Your support has meant the difference between winning and losing. We can only keep winning if we can keep competing with an opponent who outspends us so massively. So, I hope you'll go to HillaryClinton.com and show your support tonight because the future of this campaign is in your hands.

Some people counted me out and said to drop out, but the American people don't quit and they deserve a president who doesn't quit either.

Tonight all across Pennsylvania and America, teachers are grading papers and doctors and nurses are caring for the sick, and you deserve a leader who listens to you.

Waitresses are pouring coffee and police officers are standing guard and small businesses are working to meet that payroll, and you deserve a champion who stands with you.

And of course, all across the world, our men and women in uniform, some on your second, third or fourth tour of duty, you deserve a Commander-in-Chief who will finally bring you home and who will rebuild our strained military, do whatever it takes to care for our veterans wounded in both body and spirit.

Today, here in Pennsylvania, you made your voices heard and because of you, the tide is turning.

We were up against a formidable opponent who outspent us three to one. He broke every spending record in this state trying to knock us out of the race. Well, the people of Pennsylvania had other ideas tonight.

The presidency is the toughest job in the world, but the pressures of a campaign are nothing compared to the pressures of the White House, and today, Pennsylvanians looked through all the heat and saw the light of a brighter tomorrow - a tomorrow of shared prosperity and restored world leadership for peace, security, and cooperation. After seven long years of President Bush, we've got our work cut out for us and we don't have a minute to waste. So, it's high time we stop talking about our problems and start solving them and that is what my campaign is all about.

All through this campaign, I have offered solutions: solutions for good jobs you can raise a family on; jobs that can't be shipped overseas; and on Earth Day, clean, renewable green jobs that can put us on the right track to the future; solutions for independence from foreign oil and exploding gas prices; quality affordable healthcare not just for many Americans or most Americans but for every single American, no exceptions and no excuses; affordable college and real improvements in public schools, not the failure that is No Child Left Behind. We're going to end the war on science and have a renewed commitment to science and research. We will tackle everything from Autism to Alzheimer's, cancer to diabetes, and make a real difference.

I look forward to discussing all of these issues with the people of Indiana, North Carolina and the states that I'll be visiting in the coming weeks.

Not long ago a woman handed me a photograph of her father as a young soldier. He was receiving the Medal of Honor from President Truman at the White House. During World War II, he had risked his life on a daring mission to drive back the enemy and protect his fellow soldiers. In the corner of that photo, in shaky handwriting, this American hero had simply written: "To Hillary Clinton, keep fighting for us." And that is what I'm going to do because America is worth fighting for. You are worth fighting for.

It was in this city that our founders declared America's independence and our permanent mission to form a more perfect union. Neither Senator Obama nor I nor many of you were fully included in that vision, but we've been blessed by men and women in each generation who saw America not as it is, but as it could and should be. The abolitionists and the suffragists, the progressives and the union members, the civil rights leaders, all those who marched, protested and risked their lives because they looked into their children's eyes and saw the promise of a better future.

Because of them, I grew up taking for granted that women could vote. Because of them, my daughter grew up taking for granted that children of all colors could attend school together. And because of them and because of you, this next generation will grow up taking for granted that a woman or an African American can be the president of the United States of America.

I am so honored by the support and the hospitality of all of the people of Pennsylvania. I want to especially thank Governor Rendell and Mayor Nutter, Lieutenant Governor Catherine Baker Knoll and the State Treasurer Robin Wiessmann and State Party Chair T.J. Rooney. These are great leaders and dear friends, as are my friends from the Congress, Representatives Murtha, Sestak, Schwartz and Kanjorski. Their support means the world to me and the support of 100 mayors across this commonwealth and so many other state and local leaders who worked hard for this victory tonight.

I want to thank my friends in our labor unions for standing with us every step of the way. And my outstanding staff, volunteers and supporters here in Pennsylvania and across America.

I especially want to thank my family for their incredible love and support. Bill and Chelsea have crisscrossed Pennsylvania from one end to the other. My brothers Hugh and Tony who love Pennsylvania with all their hearts, from our childhood summers in Lake Winola, and my mother who is with us tonight.

We still have a lot of work ahead of us, but if you're ready, I'm ready. I might stumble and I might get knocked down, but as long as you'll stand with me I will always get right back up. Because for me, in the end, the question isn't whether we can keep America's promise, it's whether we will keep America's promise.

So let me ask you tonight - will we once again be the can-do nation, the nation that defies the odds and does the impossible?

Will we break the barriers and open the doors and lift up all of our people?

Will we reach out to the world and lead by the power of our ideals again?

Will we take back the White House and take back our country?

I believe with all of my heart that together we will turn promises into action, words will become solutions, hope will become reality, so my answer to any who doubt is "yes, we will."

Thank you and God bless you.

Hello, Montana Democrats. Let me ask you something: Are you ready to take back the White House and take back this country? Well, so am I.
I am thrilled to be here tonight on the "richest hill on earth." I wanted to come out here for St. Patrick's Day, but I'm glad I decided to come tonight instead. Because the only party in Butte that is better than St. Patrick's Day is the Democratic Party.

They say Butte could be considered the birthplace of the Democratic Party in the Rocky Mountain West. And I am pleased to be where Mike Mansfield walked these streets and worked in the mines up the hills. I am also pleased to be here with your great governor, Governor Schweitzer, who has made such an impression far beyond the borders of Montana.

In New York, we love to quote Schweitzer-isms, there's a growing body of them. But it's great to be here and to be with my two colleagues, your great senators, Senators Max Baucus and Jon Tester. Having Max and Jon in the Senate is such a great tribute to the people of Montana. I want to thank you for sending them there, and I know that you'll keep sending Max and you'll keep sending Jon because we need them there every step of the way.

I also want to thank Congressman Pat Williams and State Senate Majority Leader Carol Williams for their support and endorsement.

To all the elected officials, the active and committed Democrats in this audience: who says there aren't a lot of Democrats in Montana; there are people outside who couldn't get in tonight.

This Mansfield-Metcalf dinner is a great place for us to celebrate the resurgence in the West of the Democratic Party. I am so glad that this election will go on because by holding the last primary, the "last, best place" is going to help choose the next president of the United States.

It will not be a moment too soon. As I have travelled across our great country, the overwhelming feeling that I see expressed by not just Democrats, but even Republicans, Independents and people who don't frankly get very much involved in politics, is that we stand on the cusp of a new beginning for America. If you listen closely, you can almost hear it in the distance - the sound of the moving van pulling away from the back of the White House.

We all wish that it would be tomorrow that President Bush would return to that ranch and cut that brush instead of cutting back on children's health care and cutting back on veteran's health care and cutting back on the future for our children.

But I believe the whole world will breathe a sigh of relief when George Bush and Dick Cheney finally hand over those keys. But that's not when our work ends, that's when our work begins. I don't think we even know how much damage has been done to our country by the failed policies and the wrong-headed priorities of this administration. For the past seven years, President Bush has conducted a dangerous experiment in extremism. It has failed our country.

He has had two priorities: tax cuts for the wealthiest and the war in Iraq, and he hasn't paid for either one of them. He inherited a balanced budget and a surplus and he's leaving behind a mountain of debt. He's mortgaged our future with his reckless spending, while ignoring the problems that continue to pile up. So here we are, in April of 2008, and we are borrowing money from the Chinese to buy oil from the Saudis. I don't believe it is right to stick our children and our grandchildren with the bill for President Bush's failed presidency.

It will be up to us as Democrats to reassert the confidence and competence of our country's future. I am totally optimistic. I know how severe the problems are that we face. I understand completely how difficult it will be to turn our country around. But there isn't any problem America can't solve, there isn't any challenge we can't meet so long as we start acting like Americans again; rolling up our sleeves and getting to work together.

The contrasts could not be greater; instead of trying to solve our problems, President Bush has used fear to divide us and fatalism to discourage us. He wants us to believe that we can't solve our problems, and that we shouldn't even try. Moving toward energy independence, well that would wreck our economy, they tell us. Moving toward universal health care, well that would wreck our health care system. Since when did America become the can't-do nation? As far as I know and the way I was raised, we know that you roll up your sleeves and you face the future realistically. Yes, we do have to do what is necessary to take back the future. But I am convinced beyond a shadow of a doubt that America is ready. We are ready to be called to greatness again. We are ready to be asked to sacrifice on behalf of this country that we love.

For seven years, the drug companies, the insurance companies, the oil companies and Wall Street have had a President; I think it's time the American people had a President again.

We need a Commander-in-Chief who is ready on day one to end the war in Iraq and keep our children safe, someone who knows how to manage this economy and strengthen the middle class. The American people need a fighter on their side, a President who will get up every single day and work her heart out for you, for your families, for your jobs and your futures. I am here tonight because I am ready to be that President.

If there is one word that sums up my campaign and what it's all about, its solutions. I'm offering real solutions, not just speeches. I want to create a better future by making it clear that we have to not only set out a vision, we've got to know how to get there. You know that old story about how our political parties are like driving a car, don't you? If you want to go forward, you put it in D. If you want to go backwards, you put it in R. Well, we're going forward in D. And here's why Democrats need to drive that car forward again.

Tonight, across Montana and across America, teachers are grading papers and nurses are caring for the sick, and they need a President who listens to them. Tonight, janitors are cleaning up, and waitresses are pouring coffee, and police officers are standing guard. And they need a President who stands with them. Tonight, families are sitting down around the dinner table, talking about how to keep the farm in the family or how to keep up with the bills that are mounting, and they need a President who will deliver for them. Tonight, our brave men and women in uniform are serving across the globe, some on their second, their third or their fourth deployment. And they deserve a Commander-in-Chief who respects them, who cares for them and their families, and who brings them home and takes care of them once they do come back.

Americans deserve so much better. I am in this race to offer those solutions, because I believe America's best days are still ahead of us. For me, this is not just about the next election. This is about the next generation and what we must do to keep faith, to ensure that our children and our grandchildren have the same blessings and opportunities that we were given, to make the most of their own lives, to take the tools that are the product of a free market and the incredible entrepreneurial energy and innovation of America and put it to work, not only for a better future for themselves but for our country and our world.

So when I say solutions, I mean an economy that works for everyone, not just those at the top. An economy where prosperity is shared again, and we create good jobs, jobs that will rebuild our infrastructure, jobs in clean, renewable energy, jobs in science and research, jobs that can support a family with a middle class standard of living that gives people hope in the future that they are building for themselves.

When I say solutions, I mean reigning in those corporate special interests and rebuilding the middle class. I have proposed $100 billion in middle class tax cuts, tax cuts that will go for healthcare, to make college affordable, for secure retirement. Part of the way we'll do that is to take away the $55 billion in tax cuts that have gone to those who, frankly, do not need your money more than you need your money. Explain to me how it can make any sense that we have a tax code that still gives tax benefits to companies that move jobs and profits out of Montana to foreign countries. We're going to end that. We're going to tell people the tax code of the United States will reflect the patriotic investment in jobs and businesses right here, in order to build a stronger economy. How is it fair that a Wall Street money manager making $50 million a year pays a lower percentage in taxes to our government than a nurse, a teacher, or a truck driver right here in Montana pays to that government of ours?

And when I say solutions, I mean a return to fiscal responsibility. I was raised by a father who didn't believe in credit, didn't have a credit card, didn't buy a house until he could pay for it; so I'm a little cheap. But I think that's what we need in a president again, who starts having the federal government live within our means.

We're going to get back to pay-as-you-go, and we're going to take a scalpel to that budget and look for anything we can take out so that we put our priorities back in. Enough with the no-bid contracts to Halliburton and all of those crony companies of George Bush's. There is absolutely no evidence that outsourcing our government saves money, but what it does is line the pockets of those companies and remove accountability.

Back in the 1990's, we saw rising incomes. The typical family saw $7,000 in income that came to them because the economy was moving up. More people were lifted out of poverty. It was a good time for America. Occasionally, in this campaign, I hear somebody criticize the 90's. That's fair. But I always wonder to myself, what is it they didn't like, the peace, or the prosperity? I could never figure that part out.

When I say solutions, I mean making our federal government a partner with rural America. Now I don't want to shock you tonight, but you may be surprised to learn that New York is home to 34,000 family farms. I know, where do they all go under the Empire State Building? But across our state and across so much of rural America, there is a feeling that the deck is stacked against family farms. I'm committed to working with your two great senators, to pass a strong Farm Bill that works for true family farms, with priorities like permanent disaster relief, strengthening country of origin labeling, renewable energy advances, rural development, broadband deployment.

And I want to salute the leadership of Senator Baucus and Senator Tester. This Farm Bill needs to move and the president needs to get out of the way so that we can start taking care of rural America.

It is great to have Senator Tester in the Congress as a family farmer and an organic farmer. He has been a breath of fresh air. And of course we couldn't have a Farm Bill or nearly any other bill that actually had any money attached to it without Senator Baucus. So Montana is right in the middle of these debates.

When I say solutions, I mean declaring energy independence. I want America to sign a declaration of energy independence. I want our citizens to sign it because there's work for all of us to do to move toward energy independence. It's time we declared our independence from foreign oil. It's time we began looking for solutions from home grown energy.

I want to be a president who is a good partner for Governor Schweitzer to help tap into the natural resources right here in Montana - biofuels, clean coal, wind energy. The future has so much potential but we've been going backwards. We are actually more dependent on foreign oil today than we were on 9/11. Explain how that makes any sense. I was waiting for President Bush after 9/11 to say here's how we will respond, a goal that will move us away from our dependence on foreign oil. Well, we've never heard a word like that and I know we're not going to move on clean coal or biofuels or wind or solar or the transmission and distribution system we need to transport what is created here elsewhere in the country. I know we won't do that until the two oil men leave the White House but as soon as they do, let's be ready.

As President, I will invest in alternative energy with a $50 billion strategic energy fund paid for in two ways, by taking the tax subsidies away from the oil companies. It is hard to explain how a company like Exxon Mobil that makes $40 billion in profits last year needs your money to be successful. And certainly, when you look at what we need to do, that $50 billion strategic energy fund, we'll also ask the oil companies to be part of the solution instead of the problem. They can invest in renewable sources. They can clean up their facilities to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, or they can be subject to a windfall profits tax which we will take and put to work on developing alternative renewable energy here in Montana.

I figure we can create at least five million new good jobs and these are jobs that can't be outsourced. These are jobs that can be done right here in Montana. Because it is way passed time for us to stop holding hands with the Saudis, and started holding them accountable. That's the kind of president that you can expect me to be.

When I say solutions, I mean it is time to finally get tough on China. Right now, China's products come here and our jobs go there. We play by the rules, they manipulate their currency. We get tainted fish, lead-laced toys, contaminated pet food and polluted pharmaceuticals. I think that's a raw deal - and the United States government should say no more, no how, we're going to have new rules, they're going to play by the same rules and we're going to stand up for our consumers and our workers.

When I say solutions, I mean finally providing universal health care. Every single American will be covered. We have two big problems. We have the problem of 47 million uninsured - including more than 160,000 right here in Montana - and then we have the problem of people who are insured except when it comes time to have the insurance company pay the bill, the insurance company won't pay the doctor or the hospital. So here's what I believe. If you have health insurance and you're happy with it, nothing changes. But if you are uninsured or underinsured, we're going to open up the Congressional Health Plan. Congress has a plan for itself and federal employees with more than 250 choices. It covers preventive care, mental health care, the kind of comprehensive health care that every American should have access to. For those who can't afford it, we're going to offer health care tax credits and I would like to see us limit the amount of money that anyone ever has to pay for their health care premium to a small percentage of your income.

And we we're going to regulate the insurance companies so they not longer can discriminate against people. I think it is way past time. In our country it is unconstitutional to discriminate on the basis of race or religion or gender or ethnic origin and that is all for the good. But insurance companies can discriminate against you if you're sick or if you ever have been sick. It's time for us to tell the insurance companies no more discrimination, no more making life and death decisions. That should be left to doctors and nurses, not insurance company bureaucrats, and we're going to move toward universal health care coverage finally in America.

When I say solutions, I mean public schools that are worthy of our children, starting with universal pre-kindergarten going all the way through. I believe you've got to start with pre-school, with Head Start, Early Head Start, universal pre-k so that all of our children get off to a good beginning. And I will end the unfunded mandate known as No Child Left Behind.

I believe in accountability and I have worked for that for more than 25 years, but I don't think you get that by turning our students into little test takers and our teachers into big test givers. We need a new partnership, a new partnership between the federal government, our schools, our students, our families and communities. I will offer that. I will also work to make sure that college is affordable for every single hard working student in America.

When I say solutions, I mean keeping faith with our Native Americans, the first Americans. It is time that we had a president who understood that we should fully fund the Indian Health Service; that we should respect the government-to-government relationship, that we will have, once again, a partnership from the White House across America. Every tribe, both in Indian Country and in urban areas, because I believe we must keep faith with our very first Americans and I pledge, I will do whatever I can to make that happen.

When I say solutions, I mean standing up always for Social Security. Senator Baucus led the fight against President Bush's attempts to privatize Social Security. I was proud to fight alongside him every step of the way. When I am president, you are never going to have to worry about anybody privatizing your Social Security.

Of course, we have a lot of work to do around the world. We have to restore America's leadership and our moral authority. That begins by ending the war in Iraq and bringing our troops home as quickly and responsibly as possible. It means reaching out to the rest of the world to find common ground to combat our challenges. We can't tackle global warming alone; as president I will lead the way to a new global agreement that will include India and China and the other fast developing countries. Every part of the world must be committed to reversing global warming. When we think about taking on global warming or global terrorism or global epidemics, America, once again, must be respected. You cannot be a leader if no one is following and for too long under President Bush countries have been on the sidelines or even actively opposed to us. I will immediately launch comprehensive global diplomatic efforts asking distinguished Americans of both parties to travel across the world, to send a message that once again the United States wants to engage, wants to listen, wants to work with you.

As we move from the war in Iraq to once again standing on behalf of peace and security, we will be bringing our sons and daughters home. They will need a new 21st century G.I. Bill of Rights, with money to go to college, money for a home, money to start a business. It has been heartbreaking as a senator to see how many of our veterans have been left alone to fight a bureaucracy and cut through the red tape to get the health care they need; to get the compensation they deserve. I will be a Commander-in-Chief who recognizes that we have the greatest military in the world but force should be used as a last resort, not a first resort in the interest of our country and furtherance of our values.

And it almost goes without saying but it must be said, that we will bring our Constitution out of cold storage. We will restore the separation of powers, the checks and balances. We will end the abusive practices and power grabs of the Bush/Cheney administration.

This is the America we will build together - an America where the next generation is always better off than the last. But in order to begin to do this work, we have to win in November. That means we have to defeat Senator McCain; a good man with a great record of serving America. He's a friend and colleague of mine and I admire his service, but he is offering the wrong ideas for our country. It is important that in the fall election we have a nominee ready to go toe-to-toe with John McCain on national security. He is willing to keep troops in Iraq for up to 100 years. I'll start bringing them home within the first 60 days of my taking office.

Senator McCain has admitted he doesn't really understand the economy. And unfortunately, he is proving it in this campaign. He looks at the home mortgage crisis and who does he blame? Not Wall Street, which helped create this mess in the first place. He blames the homeowners. He doesn't seem to understand that if our federal government can find $30 billion to bail out one firm on Wall Street, we ought to be able to find $30 billion to help homeowners stay in their homes and not lose them to the predatory practices of the mortgage industry.

I think we've had enough of a president who didn't know enough about economics and didn't do enough for the American middle class. We're ready for a President who, no matter whether that 3 a.m. call is about national security or an economic crisis, actually answers the phone and doesn't let it ring and ring and ring, trying to avoid taking responsibility for the mess that will be there when George Bush leaves.

Taking back the White House won't be easy. You'd think that after George Bush's presidency the Republicans would apologize to America. It might go something like this: "We are so sorry. We're not even going to run against you this time." I don't think that'll happen. In fact, I'm pretty sure that it'll be the same old Republican attack machine. They'll be out there in full force, and we're going to have to be ready to take them on.

I want you to know that I'm ready. I've been in there, in their attack mode for a long time. I know what it's like to stumble. I know what it means to get knocked down. But I've never stayed down. I never will. And neither will America.

That's another reason why I feel right at home here because throughout Butte's history, you never quit. When the silver market crashed at the end of the 1800's, you refused to give up, you kept digging, and you found copper. When the deep copper mines closed in the 1950's, you found new mining technology and you kept going.

Many times the national press and the pundits have said: "Butte's a goner." But you said: "No, we aren't." And your progress today proves you were right. I'm awfully happy to be among people who have the spunk, the courage, and the determination to stay in the fight, to keep fighting for a better tomorrow, to know that we're going to bring that same spirit to this campaign. Because one thing you know about me, when I tell you I'll stand with you, I'll stand with you. When I tell you I'll fight for you, I will fight for you. That's what I have done my whole life, and that's what we're going to do all the way to the White House next January 20th, 2009.

We're going to fight across all 50 states. We're going to campaign everywhere in America because we need to keep fighting because America is worth fighting for. Everyday that goes by in this campaign, I become more determined and more convinced that we will be able to convince the American people to believe once again in our future; that we are a nation of optimists, a nation of idealists. We know what it takes to continue the progress that is the American birth right.

So tonight, we say with one voice: give us the child that wants to learn. Give us the people in need of work. Give us the veterans who need our care. We say, give us this economy to rebuild and this war to end. Give us this nation to lift, this world to lead, this moment to seize. The Democrats are ready, I am ready, and I know Montana Democrats, you're ready, too. Let's go forward to victory. Thank you, God bless you and God bless America.

Thank you. Thank you. It's great to be back here at Penn and in Philadelphia. I remember giving the commencement address here some years ago and I always had that image of the beauty of this campus and, of course, its extraordinary reputation. And I'm delighted to have a chance to be here with you to talk about an issue that is critical not only to Pennsylvania but to our country.
I want to thank Congresswoman Schwartz, she and I will be together later this afternoon. I'm looking forward to that very much. Mayor Nutter, I have heard the governor say that you could be the second best mayor in Philadelphia history. I know you're aiming for first, so keep it up. You're doing a great job. And Governor Rendell who has been so visionary and strategic in his leadership first to Philadelphia, then of course to Pennsylvania. And what he just said about how he and his administration responded to the first signs of trouble from the mortgage market is just typical of Ed Rendell. He really is someone who is always looking to solve problems and that's why he's been so successful and why I'm so grateful for his support.

I want to take a moment to note yesterday's heartbreaking news that five years after the start of the war there have now been 4,000 U.S. military deaths in Iraq. Tens of thousands of our brave men and women have also suffered serious wounds, both visible and invisible, to their bodies, their minds, and their hearts. As president, I intend to honor their extraordinary service and the sacrifice of them and their families by ending this war and bringing them home as quickly and responsibly as possible.

As the headlines of the past months have made clear, we are experiencing a crisis of confidence in our country. We have a crisis of confidence in our leadership with respect to Iraq and we have a crisis of confidence in our economy. What started out as a subprime mortgage crisis has now become a national credit crisis, rippling out from banks and boardrooms to businesses and living rooms across America. We've had three straight months of private sector job losses. Consumer confidence is down and falling. The dollar has hit record lows and gas prices, record highs. And last week the Federal Reserve took unprecedented measures to rescue Wall Street, the likes of which we haven't seen since the Great Depression. These are not just red flags or warning signs - they are indisputable indicators that our economy is in serious trouble. And now we face an urgent question: how do we keep today's turmoil from spiraling into a long and painful recession? This is no easy task.

The 21st century American economy is more complex and more interconnect with the global economy than ever before. It is shaped each day by billions and billions of individual transactions and interactions on every continent. Subject to crises or even just speculation in one country can move markets in dozens of others with the blink of an eye or a flick of a mouse.

In today's economy, trouble that starts on Wall Street often ends up on Main Street. Sometimes within minutes, sometimes over the course of months or even years. When there's a run on mortgage-backed securities and the bottom falls out for investment banks, the bottom falls out for families who see the value of their homes, their greatest source of wealth, decline. When our credit markets freeze up, that doesn't just cause panic on our trading floors, but in small businesses that can't get the capital they need to survive. And on college campuses like this one, when the student loan for next semester falls through. When we continue to persist in brain dead energy policy as confidence in our currency erodes, that means gas prices so high you feel like it costs more to commute to work than you make when you get there. It means rising food prices that strain household budgets. It means having less left over for savings or ever dipping into savings to make ends meet. It means more challenges for the mayor because property tax revenues drop, businesses don't have the same ability to make that profit that benefits the city. It means more problems for the governor who has to look across a complex state economy trying to figure out how to keep what has been a remarkable string of real budget balances and surpluses. It causes problems for our country.

Ultimately the true currency of today's American economy is confidence. When people lose confidence in the economy and our president's ability to manage it, problems become crises and crises lead to more crises. So we need a president who can restore our confidence, a president who is ready to confront complex economic problems with comprehensive solutions, a president who will act at the first signs of trouble, working with experts to identify the problem, with agencies to adapt regulations, with congress to pass necessary legislation, working to prevent crises rather than just reacting too little too late. We need a president who is ready on day one to be Commander-in-Chief of our economy. If you give me the chance, I will be that president. I will start by facing our economic situation as it is, not as we wish it would be.

That means acknowledging that our economic crisis is, at its core, a housing crisis, a crises caused in part by unscrupulous mortgage lenders and brokers and unregulated transactions in mortgage-backed securities, in part by speculators who were buying multiple houses to sell for a quick buck and other buyers who didn't act responsibly. And in part by a president and administration who failed to anticipate and continue to downplay the problems we face. Unlike what happened here in Pennsylvania, when Governor Rendell started seeing problems - and I remember those articles we had in the newspaper, governor, where the housing supply was being, you know, expanded and people were putting zero money down and they were trying to once again get the American dream, they were commuting sometimes two hours to be able to afford that house. Well, those warning signals went unheeded in Washington. But thankfully, not in Harrisburg. And what we have to do now is to look at our housing crisis in greater detail. And I'd like to outline my plans to address it.

2.2 million foreclosure notices went out last year - up 75% from 2006. Communities of color have been especially hard hit. Subprime loans are five times more common in predominantly African American neighborhoods than predominantly white ones. And 41% of loans to Hispanics are subprime compared to only 22% to whites. But this crisis isn't just about the more than 2 million households at risk of losing their homes and, of course, 2.2 million foreclosure notices means many more people than that because obviously you have homes where anywhere from two to ten people live. It's about the tens of millions of families who have lost value in their homes.

When I talk about the home foreclosure crisis, sometimes people, I can tell, look at me a little skeptically because they, I can tell, they're thinking to themselves, I didn't buy one of those mortgages, I don't have an ARM, I'm not at risk. But, in fact, that is just not the case. Home prices dropped almost 9% last quarter. Home prices for everyone. If you have paid off your home, if you have a fixed rate mortgage with a manageable interest rate, you have suffered the steepest decline on record. That means families have lost at least $1.9 trillion in housing wealth so far, nearly two-thirds of the size of the entire United States government budget. And today, nearly 9 million families are struggling with mortgages that are under water. They actually owe more for their mortgages than their homes are worth. So what was once their biggest financial asset is now a financial liability.

The housing crisis is also a crisis for our cities, our towns and our neighborhoods. At least 41 million homes will lose value because of foreclosures in their neighborhoods, including 1.7 million homes right here in Pennsylvania. Abandoned homes and boarded up neighborhoods mean higher crime rates, lower property values, and plummeting tax receipts for cities and towns across America. Now, a year ago in March 2007 I called for immediate action to address abuses in the subprime market, and I laid out detailed concrete proposals for how to do so. I warned this administration that the problems in subprime mortgages would soon spill over into regular mortgages. The response from our president? Well, his Treasury Secretary told Congress that the problem was, quote, "contained." And president himself assured us there would be a, quote, "soft landing for the housing market." The housing crisis then spread from subprime to traditional mortgages. And in August of last year, I warned the administration that the housing mortgage crisis would soon ripple out throughout the entire economy. Again, I called for immediate action and laid out concrete proposals to prevent foreclosures and help states hard hit by this crisis.

I also called for tighter regulation of the housing market, starting with unscrupulous mortgage brokers who were taking advantage of our families. I would require mortgage brokers to disclose right up front that they're paid based on the size of the mortgage they sell, to put buyers on notice. I would work with states to develop strong, meaningful broker licensing standards to screen brokers and govern their conduct and I would require all brokers to register with the federal government so that home buyers can do their own background checks to ensure they're dealing with someone who will deal fairly with them.

I also called for greater regulation of mortgage lenders. I would eliminate the prepayment penalties that lead to such high rates of default. I would require lenders to take into account the borrower's ability to pay property taxes and insurance fees when deciding whether to make a loan in the first place. Too many loan lenders haven't made that part of the calculation and too many families don't know that they need to budget for these expenses. In October, I proposed legislation, the Foreclosure Rescue Fraud Act, that imposed new criminal penalties on lenders who were taking advantage of people, offering foreclosure rescue schemes that lure families in, take their money and do nothing to help them.

I've also proposed that we amend the bankruptcy code to give judges the discretion to write down the value of struggling families' homes. Believe it or not, bankruptcy judges can write down the value of many other things to help families pay off their debt, but not their homes. They can write off the value or write down the value of second homes, which seems kind of ironic to me. Making this amendment to the code will help families in bankruptcy pay off their mortgages and stay in their homes.

Now, the response to all of this from the administration? Well, they continued their wait and don't see approach, largely ignoring the mounting problems. By December of last year the mortgage crisis had become a national credit crisis. So I went to New York City and I told Wall Street they needed to do their part to address this crisis. I put forward an aggressive plan for a 90-day moratorium on all subprime foreclosures and a voluntary five-year freeze on interest rates for all subprime mortgages. The response from this administration? A plan that let banks off the hook and left homeowners to fend for themselves. In the words of one expert, the president's plan was the bank lobby's dream. This administration's top economic priority it seems has been to lavish roughly $400 billion in tax cut on the wealthiest 1% of Americans while families have lost nearly five times that in the value of their homes.

Last week when it became clear Wall Street was on the brink of a financial melt down, the Fed and the administration sprang into action. The Fed extended a $30 billion lifeline to prevent Bear Stearns from imploding and took unprecedented action to provide tens of billions of dollars in credit for other struggling investment banks as well. Homeowners, on the other hand, have received next to no assistance. Well, let's be clear. When families are losing their homes, that's also a financial crisis. When people's greatest source of wealth is losing its worth, as college costs and health care costs and food and gas prices shoot up, that's a financial crisis too. When "for sale" signs line streets across our country, when cities and towns are struggling with the costs of foreclosed properties, that is also a financial crisis.

Our families are feeling the anxiety right now. I hear their stories every day, from Florida to Wisconsin, from California and Nevada to Pennsylvania. Last month, a little girl stood up at a town hall I was holding and asked me what I was going to do "about people and children that don't have any food or houses?" I started to commend her on her concern for those less fortunate, when she interrupted me and said, "I'm losing my home." Her mother is a hair dresser whose customers are tightening their belts. They're not coming in as often, they're not having as much done. They had an adjustable rate mortgage they could no longer afford.

We've come together today in the city where the American ideals of "Life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness" - of justice and equality - were inscribed into our founding documents. But what does all that mean to a family that's lost its nest egg and the hopes and dreams that went with it? What does it mean to a little girl who goes to sleep at night worried about losing her home?

Our housing crisis is at heart an American Dream crisis. Your home isn't just your greatest asset, your greatest source of wealth - it's your greatest source of security. It's what anchors you to your neighborhood and community. It's the center of your family.

For the past seven years, we've had a president who stands up for the special interests - for the insurance companies and the mortgage companies and Wall Street. Now it's time for a president who stands up for American families, a president who will rein in the special interests and rebuild the American middle class.

Over the past week, we've seen unprecedented action to maintain confidence in our credit markets and head off a crisis for Wall Street banks. It's now time for equally aggressive action to help families avoid foreclosure and to keep communities across our country from spiraling into recession.

Today, I am announcing my four part plan to Protect American Homeowners: A plan to help our families keep their homes and help communities hard hit by the housing crisis.

My plan starts with an aggressive new effort to help millions of at-risk families restructure their mortgages and stay in their homes. Of the tens of millions of Americans who have lost value in their homes, 8.8 million are struggling with these mortgages underwater. That is more than 10 percent of all homeowners -- the highest percentage since the Great Depression. If home prices fall another 15 percent, one third of all homeowners will find themselves in the same boat.

The time for action is now - not a month from now, or a year from now - but now. And the reality is that many of our families need more than just basic refinancing. That's why I support new legislation proposed by my colleagues, Representative Barney Frank and Senator Chris Dodd that would expand the government's capacity to stand behind mortgages that are reworked on affordable terms.

Currently, families apply to the government, and the government decides on an individual basis whether to work with them to restructure their mortgages. You heard the governor say that maybe there will be 1,000 families that will be helped in Pennsylvania. This is a slow process that helps relatively few families, and it simply isn't enough to revive our housing market.

The Frank-Dodd legislation would move beyond this incremental approach by setting up an auction system for mortgage companies that hold hundreds of thousands of these mortgages. Through this system, these companies could sell mortgages in bulk to banks and other buyers. The buyers would be willing to purchase these mortgages - and restructure them to make them affordable for families - because they know the government will guarantee them once they are refinanced.

This would be good for families, who can keep their homes. It would be good for mortgage lenders, because it's more profitable than foreclosures. It would be good for our economy, helping to unfreeze our credit markets.

But given the severity of today's housing crisis, simply facilitating this auction process might not be enough to get our economy moving again. That's why I believe the Federal Housing Administration should also stand ready to be a temporary buyer - to purchase, restructure, and resell underwater mortgages.

Just as it has in the past, this kind of temporary measure by the government could give our economy the boost it needs and families the help they certainly need. It would not require a single new federal bureaucracy, it would be designed to be self-financing over time - so it would cost taxpayers nothing in the long run.

It is a sensible way for everyone - lenders, investors, mortgage companies and borrowers - to share responsibility, keep families in their homes, stabilize communities and the economy.

In order to determine whether the approach outlined by Representative Frank and Senator Dodd is sufficient - or whether we need the government to step in as a purchaser - I am calling on President Bush to appoint an emergency working group on foreclosures. That is the second part of my plan.

We simply cannot wait until Congress passes legislation to find the best way to help millions of families.

That's why I'm proposing an Emergency Working Group on Foreclosures. It could be led by a distinguished, non-partisan group of economic leaders like Alan Greenspan, Robert Rubin, Paul Volcker. It's the kind of proactive step that would help re-establish confidence in our economy by showing that the President and the Administration was taking our economic crisis seriously.

I've been calling for several weeks for the President to show some sense of urgency. The group's first order of business would be to determine how the government should implement the solutions proposed in the Frank-Dodd legislation - and whether this legislation goes far enough.

If it's decided additional steps are needed, then we should investigate whether - and how - the Federal Housing Administration or other government entities, or Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, could buy, restructure and resell underwater mortgages. The group would report back to Congress on a very tight timeline - no more than three weeks.

In the meantime, while the Emergency Working Group is being formed, we should implement the moratorium on foreclosures that I first called for in December. Every unnecessary home foreclosure just worsens the credit crisis and further depresses housing prices. Secretary Paulson and others have finally acknowledged the need for this moratorium in certain cases. I hope we will act to implement it as quickly as possible to implement it.

The third part of my plan is a new housing stimulus package to provide $30 billion directly to states and localities, like Pennsylvania and Philadelphia, hard hit by this crisis.

Right now, concentrated clusters of foreclosures are devastating some communities. A recent study of ten states by the U.S. Conference of Mayors found that the foreclosure crisis will lead to 6.6 billion dollars in lost tax revenues in just those ten states alone.

Just over a month ago, Congress passed, and President Bush signed, a $168 billion stimulus package. But this package did next to nothing to help homeowners and communities struggling with foreclosures. I said at the time, if we did not address the housing crisis, we would not be able to stem the bleeding. Congress is trying to combat a recession caused by the housing crisis without doing anything to address that crisis.

Well, if the Fed can extend $30 billion to help Bear Stearns address their financial crisis, the federal government should provide at least that much emergency assistance to help families and communities address theirs.

That's why I'm calling for the creation of a one-time emergency $30 billion fund that would go directly to cities and states to address the housing crisis.

This money could be used to purchase foreclosed or distressed properties, which cities and states could then resell to low-income families or convert into affordable rental housing.

It could be used to help neighborhoods with high foreclosure rates avoid increased crime and blight by investing in everything from police and fire support to graffiti removal and better lighting.

It could also be used by local agencies to provide counseling and refinancing to help families avoid foreclosure in the first place. Governor Rendell has been leading the way with programs like that here in Pennsylvania. The Pennsylvania Homeowners Emergency Mortgage Assistance Program offers small, low-cost loans to families facing foreclosure. It has saved up to 40,000 homes since it started. And this past October, Governor Rendell launched two additional programs to help homeowners refinance and restructure their mortgages.

And we're seeing results here in Pennsylvania: Since the end of 2006, Pennsylvania's foreclosure rate has decreased 11 percent. I look forward to working with governors like Governor Rendell and with mayors like Mayor Nutter, who is already providing such outstanding leadership here in Philadelphia, to replicate this kind of success across America.

The fourth and final part of my plan involves passing new legislation to clarify legal liability for mortgage companies that act to help more borrowers stay in their homes.

Right now, many mortgage companies are reluctant to help families restructure their mortgages because they're afraid of being sued by the investment banks, the private equity firms and others who actually own the mortgage papers. Because remember, all of these mortgages were bundled up in these huge packages and sold around the world. So you can't just go down to see your mortgage broker or your bank or your other lender to work out a deal because they no longer own the paper. This is the case even though writing down the value of a mortgage is often more profitable than foreclosing - both for mortgage companies and for most of those who own the mortgages.

That's why I will be proposing legislation when Congress returns to provide mortgage companies with protection against the threat of such lawsuits. I know this kind of policy isn't particularly glamorous and it probably won't make headlines. But it will make a critical difference in helping families save their homes and getting our economy back on track.

Now, some may claim that the plan I've outlined today is a "bailout." They'll argue that it's not government's role to help. Well, that is the same kind of tired rhetoric we've been hearing for years now. And I think the American people know better. We've had enough of that old ideology. We're ready for solutions here and now.

And to those who object to our government helping middle class families and low income families devastated by the housing crisis, I say this: We've given Bear Stearns a $30 billion lifeline, we've given their creditors, their lenders their customers and those associated with them the same lifeline. We are now lending billions of dollars a day to help Wall Street banks that aren't regulated, that are not held accountable. How can you tell a family about to lose their home that there's nothing we can do to help them? How can you tell them that if they had failed spectacularly we would've helped them but because they are failing quietly, desperately, we are turning our backs? How can you tell them that there is nothing we can do to rebuild the American Dream?

I have been across our country for years. I know how much a home means to all of us.

I remember like it was yesterday when Bill bought our first home. It was back in 1975, and we were living in Arkansas and teaching at the university there in the law school. We weren't yet married - though not for lack of asking on Bill's part. And one day, we drove by this tiny red brick house with a "For Sale" sign in front. All I said was I thought it was a sweet-looking house and never thought about it again.

Several weeks later, Bill said to me, "Do you remember that house you liked? I had never been inside, I had never been outside looking inside, I had just driven by. I said, "What house that I liked?" He said, "You know, that red brick house on California Drive. Well, I bought it, so now you'd better marry me, because I can't live in it by myself."

It wasn't exactly a mansion. The kitchen needed a lot of work. But I did say yes. And that fall, we were married in the living room of that house, surrounded by our closest friends and family.

That first home meant the world to us. It was where we started our life together, celebrated birthdays, anniversaries and holidays with our friends. And families across America feel the same way; whether it is your first house or your tenth house. It is part of who we are as Americans to look at that home ownership as such an important part of the American Dream.

Today, we face unprecedented economic challenges. But we also have within our reach unprecedented economic opportunities. We've got clean energy opportunities that we are not exploiting. Utilities are changing the way they do business, focusing on efficiency, not just producing energy. Renewables like wind and solar are the most exciting prospects for American manufacturing in decades.

I've even proposed that we establish a "Carbon Reduction Mortgage Association" or a "Connie Mae" - an idea that Vice President Gore first came up with. We'd direct Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac to provide loans to help people build more and retrofit more energy efficient homes. We'd save money over the long run. We'd create millions of "green collar" jobs.

We've got infrastructure opportunities to rebuild our crumbling roads, bridges and highways, like I-95 right here in Philadelphia. Opportunities to revolutionize our public transportation systems; cut down on traffic and pollution. We can do so much that will really build the strong economy we need in the 21st century. But we won't do it by just waiting and watching and losing the opportunity to act. We've got so many great ideas that will give us the tools we need for the 21st century.

Now, turning the economy around won't be easy, but we are gathered in the very city where our founders put to paper the words that have guided our nation - and inspired the world - for more than two-hundred years. Each generation of Americans has faced threats to our ideals. Each generation has met them. We have fought wars, overcome a recession, weathered all kinds of problems, lived through the Great Depression; we've had market crises of all kinds.

Through it all, as President Franklin Roosevelt once said, "We have always held to the hope, the belief, the conviction that there is a better life, a better world, beyond the horizon." But we have to translate that hope into reality. We have to translate that conviction into solutions, and if we do, we will meet the current challenges with confidence and optimism. We will rebuild our economy - stronger, more vibrant, more resilient than ever before. It is a question of leadership. I hope we don't have to wait until the next president is sworn in, but that we will come together and exercise that leadership in both the public and the private sector as soon as possible. That's why I've set forth this plan and hope that the administration will begin to act with the urgency that the crisis before us demands.

Thank you all very much.

Well that's a great distinction, congratulations. So we came to a place that is already quite unique, here in the Y Bridge City, to talk about the future. We're joined by distinguished guests from across the state as well as the country; elected officials, leaders from labor and business and education, and some hard-working Ohioans who you'll hear from.

Now we may have come from different backgrounds but we're all here with the same purpose. And that is- when it comes to our economy, we know we can do a lot better. I have been across Ohio and across America for more than a year, actually going back about 16 years when I was first privileged to travel extensively in our country. This has been a great opportunity for me to hear firsthand from the people who are worried about their jobs because they've already seen those jobs be shipped over seas. They're worried about losing health care, because they've already seen that health care lost. They're worried about affording college because they've already seen too many young people from too many hard working families who are having a hard time affording the rising costs. They've already seen energy prices go up so fast over the last 7 years that the average family is paying more then $2,000 in energy today then they were in 2000.

So people are living with the realities, and they're meeting them with the grit and determination that we would expect from Ohioans and Americans. But it's time that we had a president who is going to be a fighter and a champion for the American people again, who would get up everyday-

Who would get up everyday and would say what are we going to do together, to the White House staff and the Cabinet and the government and the business and labor leaders in our country; what are we going to today to improve the lives of young hard working Americans? What are we going to do to rebuild a strong and prosperous middle class? That is my mission. That is what I would do as your president. I see a middle class comeback and I see it starting in places like Zanesville.

It won't happen though just by hoping for it, it will only happen if we are determined and we have a plan and we implement it, and we see the results. And that's what I intend to do. I put forth my Economic Blueprint for the 21st century; it includes a lot of the specifics that I've been traveling around Ohio talking about. We're going to rein in the corporate special interests; we can take back $55 billion in tax giveaways that the Republicans and George Bush have handed out to the oil companies, to the drug companies, to the health insurance companies. We're going to say "wait a minute Wall Street; you've had your president. Now we need a president for Main Street." And we're going to make that happen.

We're going to start investing in manufacturing again. I believe you can't have a strong economy unless you have a strong manufacturing sector. We can't rely on other countries to produce what the American military needs. So it's not only a question for our economy, it's a question for our national security. I believe we could create at least five million green collar jobs with clean renewable energy that would put Ohioans to work starting soon. I also know that if we invest in our infrastructure - more bridges, tunnels, roads, water systems, sanitation systems - we would put a lot of people to work and we would upgrade our infrastructure for the 21st century. In order to do that, we're going to close every tax loophole that still gives one penny of your tax dollars to any company that exports a job. Instead we're going to put that money to work here.

We're going to address the home foreclosure and mortgage crisis, you'll hear a little bit about that today. Too many Ohioans are losing their homes; the numbers are staggering: 150,000 homes and foreclosures last year; 13,000 notices went out in January alone. These are a lot of hard working people who thought they were going to right thing. I've said we should have a moratorium on home foreclosures. Let's figure out as way to work out keeping people in their homes, instead of having vacant houses in neighborhoods that will decrease property values for everybody.

I believe we need universal health care, no exceptions, no excuses, and I know we can achieve that.

We do need affordable college again, something that is one of my highest priorities. It is now more expensive for a young person to go to college in America than it was thirty and forty years ago, that's wrong. Through a combination of tax credit and aid, reining in the student loan companies that have been acting like predatory lenders, we're going to go back to direct lending to help students afford to go to college. And if they come out with debt, if they are willing to do a public service job like teaching or nursing or law enforcement, we will forgive their debt so that they can be debt free.

We're going to start supporting our unions again, because when unions were strong we had a strong middle class. It's not an accident. It's time that working people had a president on their side again. Finally, we are going to have trade that lifts up our families: pro-worker, pro-environment, pro-American trade. That's going to be one of my highest priorities. I know that NAFTA has hurt a lot of Ohio's families. That's why I have taken action; I'm the only candidate with a comprehensive plan to fix NAFTA. And I will also crack down on China's unfair trade practices, including currency manipulation which gives them big advantages over our companies and our country.

We're not just here to talk about what I want to do; I want to hear what people have to say about what we can do together. We have an extraordinary group of people, and I want to hear about the challenges that they face. I'm going to ask each person to introduce him or herself because I want your advice. I will be a president, just as I have been a senator, who listens. I think you learn more when you're listening than when you are talking. And what is necessary for Zanesville may not be the same as Toledo, may not be the same as San Antonio, may not be the same as Chicago or New York. So we need to look closely at what will work in communities across Ohio and America. I think that we've got some great opportunities here. We hear a lot about the problems and they are serious but I believe for every problem, there is at least one solution. We just have to start acting like Americans again and roll up our sleeves and actually solve our problems. No more whining, no more finger pointing, let's get to work.

I'd like to start our discussion today by hearing from the Ohioans who have graciously taken their time out to join us. I want to start with Dave Cimperman. Dave and I met at Grace's Grill in Parma last week. David has worked at General Motors for more than forty years, and he sees the economy from the front lines of the work force. I want to ask Dave if you can share with us what you see as the key economic challenges facing you and your family.

Well, you will have a partner in the White House to really tackle all of these challenges because they're so important. And you've given us a lot to think about. One of the issues that I'd like to get into because it's related to what governor Strickland said is both an economic opportunity and a way of giving people a real shot at the American dream–that's housing. What are we going to do to provide more housing that's affordable? And what are we going to do to deal with this home foreclosure crisis? Someone whom I admire so much is current governor of New Jersey, Jon Corzine, who's with us. He is also a former United States Senator with whom I served. And he was before that the Chief Executive Officer of one of the largest, most successful financial firms in the world, Goldman Sachs. So he's had a lot of experience in both the public and the private sector. So Governor Corzine, two questions – specifically with respect to the housing crisis, how would you have approached a financial challenge like this when you were in the private sector, and what steps do you think we should take both at the state and the federal level? And then in addition, same question to you that I asked Governor Strickland, the three big challenges that you're coping with as Governor, Governor Corzine.

That's exciting. Very exciting, Lee. You know, other countries have a head start on us. Denmark gets a lot of its energy, now, from wind. As a result it's been manufacturing a lot of the windmills and obviously exporting them. Germany is getting a great deal of economic benefit from investing in solar power and creating hundreds of thousands of jobs. And they've done exactly what you're describing. The government said "look, we've got to help start the market for this. We've got to have the low interest loans. We have to make the investments. We have to train the work force." That's why I've been a strong proponent of green collar jobs and passed the first training program to start getting people equipped to do this work. But I believe that we can create at least five million new jobs in America over the next ten years. And that's the kind of visionary work that you're doing.

Continuing our focus on jobs, which is the key here, I'd like to turn to Gary Dwyer who is the Secretary Treasurer for the Ohio State Building and Construction Trades Council. Gary Dwyer is a 33 year member of the Iron Workers. He currently represents 90,000 union construction workers in Ohio. Gary, we would love to hear your views about the best ways to create good jobs here in the state.

 It's been really a great experience working with Corning because they are committed to their community and they are committed to our country. I haven't had that experience with every company. I've had to have some pretty strong words with some CEOs who were going to move jobs out of New York even though the plan where those jobs were being performed was profitable. And the people working in the plant, some union, some non-union, they'd all gone the extra mile. They'd cut back on all of the ways they could to be more efficient. They changed work rules. Everybody felt like they were on the team together and productivity went up and profit went up. The company said we could make more money elsewhere. That, to me, is just so unfair. What we've got to do as we level the playing field is eliminate every single tax break that people still get for exporting jobs. Then we've got to start putting some tax breaks into supporting new jobs and give people the incentives to keep those jobs right here.

As you heard from Christine and from others, we keep coming back to health care costs and we do it for a reason. We cannot continue to pay what we pay for health care and remain a competitive economy with a strong and prosperous middle class. We just can't. The average American family pays $12,000 a year for a family policy. Some pay out of their pocket, some it's shared with the employer, some get more of a share than others. $12,000 a year. I feel very strongly about this issue, as you know, but I'd like to bring some additional perspectives to bear here.

Small business is the backbone and it has created the most jobs in America in the last twenty years and under my health care plan, small business would not be required to provide health care to employees but would be given benefits if they chose to help. The problem is if you are in a small business, insurance companies can really discriminate against you. I think it's unconstitutional for insurance companies to discriminate. I think they should not be permitted to do that.

The best way to get the cost down is to get everybody in the system because if you are in a small business with ten, twenty people, it's impossible if somebody gets sick. There is no way you can continue to afford that group insurance. If you are in a system with millions of people then you are going to be able to afford it, so that's why we need for small business, also to be part of the universal health care system and we can make that happen with the right kind of tax credits and limits on payment and ending insurance company discrimination, which is one of the parts of my health care system because until we get control over insurance companies, we are not going to be able to get the costs down so they have to be part of the solution. Whether they are enthusiastic about that or not, it's time that we had doctors and nurses and health care professionals and business and labor and leaders at all levels of government working together to make these changes that the insurance companies will have to go along with. That's what we're going to do if we have a chance to implement it.

Final topic is education and work force development. And Zanesville Mayor Butch Zwelling, the mayor of the Y-Bridge City, I know you are working hard to improve the skills and the training of workers here in your city and that you have had some success in bringing some new business even though you have lost some, it's been something you've worked really hard on. Could you talk about some of what you've learned about education workforce development?

You will have a friend and a partner. That's something that I look forward to and I also appreciate your mentioning the community development block grants. The way that the federal government under President Bush and the Republican Congress has cut a lot of the aid that came to communities has put extra burdens on your tax payers and that is something that we will definitely address because it's very hard for you to manage a lot of the needs you have if you are just relying upon your own resources.

Finally, Laura Meeks who is the President of Jefferson Community College. She is also the Chair of the Ohio Appalachian Center for Higher Education. Some of you may not know that Appalachia goes up into New York, so I have worked with the Appalachian Regional Council, I've worked with my colleagues, the senators from the states that are considered in Appalachia. There is a tier of counties in southern New York that have very similar problems to what we are talking about here in Ohio. Laura, you see people every single day in Ohio who are eager to get jobs, who are entrepreneurial, they are inventive, they have great ideas, they are going to work really hard. So what's the best way to make sure that these hardworking Ohioans have a chance? How do we best make them ready and train them so that we can have a real match between the jobs we can create and recruit and the workers right here in this area?

Oh great. That's so great. I just have to emphasize what you said about community colleges; they are so important for our economy. I was at Columbus State Community College a few days ago talking about the programs they have in order to train people for these new clean energy jobs and we can do this. We absolutely can do this. And I know, Gary, you've been working in some of the apprenticeship programs, Helmets to Hard Hats, a program that I've supported. So this needs to be joint effort; business, labor, government, education. All of us have to be on the same team, the American team. If we start once again playing on the American team, nobody can beat us. That's what I believe.

I really appreciate everyone coming out today, because we want this to be an ongoing conversation. There are lots of good ideas that people have and we've been working to come up with what will make a difference.

What might work in Ohio might not work in Texas, and so we've got to have a variety of approaches. The federal government needs to be a partner. Of course, that means we've got to listen and we've got to be available. It's what I believe we do best if we actually roll up our sleeves and get to work together. I've put out this "Solutions for America" economic blueprint; you can pick up copies on the way out. It's an abbreviated version, but it puts out some of the ideas that I believe could make a difference.

At the end of the day we have to decide what kinds of future we want. It doesn't happen by accident. What Laura was saying, you just don't stay at home and say I think I'll dream my way to a higher education, you've got to put on your boots, you've got to walk through the snow, you've got to deliver the application, you've got to attend the classes, you've got to be qualified.

That's true in life, and it's true in a country. So it's our chance now to seize the 21st century. I am absolutely convinced that our best days can be ahead for America. That all of the concerns we have, we can handle them. But we're going to have to be serious about how we do it. There's no doubt in my mind as I travel across Ohio that people in Ohio are ready. You have governor, a lieutenant governor, who I know are making a difference. We just need to stay with you. We can't get discouraged, we can't get into fads; try this and don't do it. Building the Erie Canal took, David, how many years? About eight, twelve years? Change does take consistent, concerted effort.

But the real question for us is not whether change will happen; change is going to happen whether we want it or not. Change is a part of life. It's whether progress will happen. Whether we'll see the kind of progress here in Ohio and Texas and America that the people of our country deserve. So I'm very confident and optimistic about what we're going to do together. And I'm very grateful that we would have this opportunity with so many distinguished Ohioans and visitors from around our country to talk about what we're going to do to make Ohio as important and prosperous and successful to America's future as it was, Governor, to America's past. Thank you all very much.

Thank you all so much. Thank you. Thank you. Oh, thank you so much, it may be a little cold outside but it sure is warm with all these Democrats making a lot of noise about what we believe in and what we care about. I am thrilled to be with you. I want to thank Lieutenant Governor Barbara Lawton for her leadership and for that really extraordinary introduction. I am so grateful to her. I want to recognize and thank Governor Jim Doyle, who is here as well, Chairman Joe Wineke and the entire Wisconsin Democratic Party. I want to thank also my colleagues in the Senate. But I really should thank all of you for sending Herb Kohl and Russ Feingold to Washington.
I don't have to tell you what extraordinary leaders they are, how much influence they exercise. We all listen when either one of them speak. And it is a great personal privilege for me to serve with them and consider them friends. I also want to recognize your Congressional Democratic Delegation, Gwen Moore and Steve Kagen. They have been extraordinary in a short period of time, and of course my dear friend and one of my co-chairs Tammy Baldwin- thank you all very much.

I know former Congressman and now Mayor Tom Barrett is here, and to all of you who are supporting this event, raising money for this party, committed to not only doing everything possible to have a great election on Tuesday with as big a turnout as we can muster, but then to make sure we go on to victory in November and that Wisconsin is in the column of the Democratic president who we will be electing.

I know we are ready. We are long past ready, we are anxious to take back the White House. And on January 20, 2009, the next president of the United States will raise his or her hand and take the oath of office, and then will immediately inherit the problems that will be left to us to solve by President Bush.

Now we're here tonight to make sure that our next president is a Democrat, because after seven long years of George W. Bush, seven years of incompetence, corruption, cronyism, seven years of this government of the few, by the few, and for the few, we have to bring change to America and put our country back on the right track.

I think about that day because obviously I've been deeply honored and privileged to have lived it in the past with my husband. I know that after the swearing in ceremony and all of the activities at the Capitol, after the walk down Pennsylvania avenue and the parade, after the Inaugural Balls, the president will walk into the Oval Office and waiting there will be two wars, an economy in trouble, millions and millions of our fellow citizens, including 547,000 right here in Wisconsin without health care, problems that we think we can predict now, and all of those that we can't even imagine: an energy crisis to solve, alliances to rebuild, a homeland to protect. Instead of solving our problems we've had a president who has stood in our way. He's used fear to divide us and fatalism to discourage us. He wants us to believe we can't solve our problems. He wants us to think we shouldn't even try. Well, like so much of George Bush's Presidency, this has done a grave disservice to America. America's character is strong, our resilience is ever-present. We will survive the eight years of George Bush and Dick Cheney and enter the future with confidence and optimism again.

Unlike our Republican friends, we Democrats still believe America is the "can do" nation. We still believe that tomorrow will be better than today, and we know it is time we started acting like Americans again. It has been disheartening, to say the least, to see the narrowing of horizons, the loss of opportunity, the sense that the American dream is receding and eroding. I have been given opportunities because of this country that my parents never had and my grandparents never dreamt of, opportunities that came because of people who, generation after generation, believed with all their heart there wasn't a problem we couldn't solve, a challenge we couldn't meet, an opportunity we could not seize; people who built our country, who raised the families, who marched and protested and risked their lives because they looked into their children's eyes and they saw reflected back at them the promise of a better future. Senator Obama and I stand here tonight because of all those who came before; who sacrificed so much to bring us to this moment in our history and it is a moment to celebrate.

Because this nation gave me every chance, because during my lifetime I have seen the barriers tumble down, the obstacles overcome, I am running for president because I believe we can do the same for every single child. We can, once again, have an America where we can say to every boy and every girl that we will give you the opportunity to live up to your God-given potential. That, for me, is what this election is about. It's not about those of us who are running; it's about your families, your futures, and your country.

Tonight across Wisconsin and across America teachers are grading papers and nurses are caring for the sick, and they need a president who hears their voices and listens to them. Tonight, here in Milwaukee and in cities across America, janitors are cleaning up, waitresses are pouring coffee, police officers are standing guard, and they need a president who stands up for them. Tonight families are sitting down to talk after losing a job or losing a home. They need a president who will deliver solutions for them.

Earlier today in Kenosha I was at a town hall event and I was reminded once again of why I do this work. You heard Barbara say that for 35 years starting when I was a young lawyer for the Children's Defense Fund, I have wanted to be a voice for those who are voiceless. I started representing abused and neglected children, children who were in the foster care system who didn't have educational or health care opportunities. I worked as the Chair of the Legal Services Corporation, appointed by President Carter to expand legal services for the poor across our nation because I had a passionate commitment to equal justice under the law. In Arkansas I reformed the education system so that children in the poorest community in the delta or in the inner city would have some shot at finding out what they could do if they were motivated and would work hard. And in the White House years we tackled a lot of tough problems, and one that I worked on and helped to make progress on was to create the Children's Health Insurance Program, to give six million kids across our country a chance to have health care.

As I was shaking hands in the crowd after my event today in Kenosha, a woman held up a sign and said, "Thank you for saving my daughter's life." I said, "what did I do?" She said, "The Children's Health Insurance Program." Then I met a young boy named Jacob who has cerebral palsy but he is doing really well. He was standing between his two proud parents. They thanked me because they never could've afforded the operations that he had.

During the town hall, I called on a little girl. She said, "What are you going to do for people who don't have homes?" I thought like many children that I've talked to across America that the plight of the homeless had really struck her heart. And I said, "well, are you concerned about people who don't have homes?" She said, "Yes, my mommy and me." So I asked them to come up and her mother talked about being a hairdresser. She said, "My business is not as good as it was. People aren't coming in as often. They are not willing to pay what I need to make a living. I'm about to be foreclosed on. I have one of those adjustable rate mortgages. I've gone from paying $600 a month to $1,000 a month. I don't think we will be able to stay in our home."

I'm reminded every single day why I do this. It's not about speeches for me, it's not about the bright lights and the cameras, it is about the changes we can make that actually deliver results in people's lives that give them a chance to live up and fulfill their own dreams.

Far from here in this beautiful ballroom, across the world our men and women in uniform are serving our country bravely and honorably, some on their second or third or even fourth tour of duty. They deserve a Commander in Chief who will bring them home.

All Americans again want, need and deserve a president who will bring your voices and your values back to the White House. I know we will all breathe a sigh of relief when that moving van pulls up in the back of the White House and George Bush and Dick Cheney turn over the keys. But this election is not just about the failures of the past seven years or the divisions of the present or the excitement of the moment. This election must be about the future we want and how we can make it a reality. We all have dreams. We have dreams for our families, for our future. Our country is founded on the idea of the American dream, that with optimism and confidence and without fear, we can make the future happen by working hard and taking responsibility. That's what has always made America great and different. This generation, like generations before us, is called to make its own commitment and sacrifice.

We, too, can be a great generation to make the American dream real in the 21st century. But to do that we must get real about what it will take to have the future we dream of. I once wrote a book called "It Takes a Village." Well, I still believe that's true. I will be a president for all of you but for me to be your president and for us to reach America's promise in this century, we also have to agree that shared opportunities and shared prosperity require shared responsibility as parents, as neighbors, as workers, as business and political leaders, as a nation. This is about all of us coming together to stake our claim on what it means to be an American in this century. There are people saying that America's best days are behind us, that the competition we face from China and elsewhere will mean that we can't continue to have a strong middle class with rising incomes and the kind of quality of life and standard of living that we have taken for granted. Well, I reject that. I know this will not be easy. Those who claim that it can be done with relatively little effort don't understand what we're up against. We face real challenges, real threats, we have to be ready to summon the experience, the wisdom and the determination to solve our problems. It will take more than just speeches to fulfill our dreams. It will take a lot of hard work.

So, if we get America back into the solutions business, if we get real about our future, I am confident that we'll be back here in five years and we will say "weren't we on top of it, didn't we understand what we had to do to make a difference." Because together there isn't anything that can stop us. So let's get real about the economy. We see an America where our economy works not just for the few, the wealthy and the well-connected, but works for all of us. How will we do that? Well, we're going to start by creating good jobs again and by keeping the jobs we have here and preventing them from being exported like they were some disposable commodity.

We can do this, we have to change our trade policy, we have to change our tax policy, we have to change our vision and understanding about what it will take to create the jobs of the future. But that's what I've been doing for years. Upstate New York has a lot in common with Wisconsin. We've lost our manufacturing base but I didn't say "well that's the end, we can't do it," because, you see, I don't believe we can have a strong economy and a strong country without a strong manufacturing base. So I'm going to work to make sure we get it back.

Let's get real about our energy policy. Let's see an America that stands up to the oil companies and the oil producing countries and says, "you don't need our tax dollars any longer to make outrageous profits." Let's begin to take the tax subsidies away from the oil companies. Let's impose a windfall profits tax on these outrageous profits and put it to work on clean renewable energy.

Now, I know we can't do any of this until the two oil men leave the White House but as soon as they do, we're going to be ready for a new energy future with the millions and millions of jobs that we can create. I think we can create five million jobs in the next ten years if we do this right. And there's no reason we can't. Earlier today I said to the folks at the Brat Shop, I said look Germany's creating jobs with solar power, hundreds of thousands of them. We have a lot of people in Wisconsin of German descent, there are as many sunny days in Wisconsin as there are in Germany -- let's get busy and create these jobs right here in Milwaukee and in Oshkosh and in Green Bay and in Eau Claire and Madison.

Let's get real about health care. Now we have a choice we have 47 million people uninsured and we can continue to think that's a terrible problem and do nothing about it or we can roll up our sleeves and come up with a uniquely American solution. That is what I have proposed. You see, I think it is morally wrong that you have 547, 000 people in Wisconsin who don't have health insurance. I think it is a national disgrace. Are we saying to ourselves we just can't figure this out? We can't take on the health insurance companies; we can't take on the Republicans to achieve universal health care? I don't accept that for a minute. Universal health care has been a fundamental Democratic party; it's been part of the progressive tradition here in Wisconsin for as long as anyone can remember. We cannot in anyway cede universal health care; it should be a defining issue in this general election. I believe we can win on universal health care.

Let's get real about education. You know, we can't continue to have unfunded mandates coming from Washington, so let's figure out what we're going to do. I will do everything possible to fully fund special education something that has been promised but never fulfilled for more then 30 years. And I will end the unfunded mandate know as No Child Left Behind, it is not working for our kids and our teachers.

And I believe we can make college affordable again if we take on the student loan industry and get them out of the way, get back to direct lending from the federal government - the way it used to work

Let's get real about restoring America's role in the world. You know as well as I do that our relationships have been destroyed. We have to rebuild our alliances. We have to be willing to find common ground with the rest of the world again. And this is not about getting everybody to like us, that's not what it's about. This is about having allies to deal with the big problems we face -- global terrorism global warming global epidemics. We can't tackle those on our own. And you know you can't be a leader if no one is following. We've got to get into the leadership business again in the world.

We also have to do everything we can to make it clear that restoring our leadership and our moral authority in the world starts with ending the war in Iraq and bringing our troops home responsibly and quickly.

I have said that I will start bringing them home within the first 60 days. From my position on the Senate Armed Services Committee I've been working to make sure that we are prepared to do that. You know, this administration has not planned for withdrawing our troops because they don't want to do it. They are going to leave it completely to us. So we have to be prepared to think this through, to make sure that we protect our young men and women as they depart. And then we have to ask ourselves, what do we do with the 100,000 plus civilians who are there. See, I think about this because I imagine what the responsibility will be like sitting alone in the Oval Office. You know, the advisors have given you their advice but ultimately it's up to you to decide. And what do we do about the Iraqis who helped us, the translators who made the difference between life and death for our soldiers and our marines. We are an honorable country and we have to withdraw in a way that keeps faith with the sacrifice of those who have been lost, with those who have been injured. And we must make it clear there is no military solution, bring our people home and tell the Iraqis they have to take responsibility for their own future.

And as we bring them home, we have to take care of them. You know in Kenosha again, a young man reached out his hand; he had a t-shirt on which said US Marine Corps. He said, "Take care of my buddies, a lot of them are still over there." He said, "And then will you please help take care of me." He said, "I can't get an appointment for months to get my problems taken care of at the V.A." You know, I think when young men and women sign up to serve America, we sign up to serve them. They deserve the health care, the compensation, the services they have earned.

Obviously to do all of this we have to take on the power structure in Washington. I'm always a little amused when someone says, "we're going to go after the special interests." There isn't anything more important then reining them in. But we've got to do it in a way that brings the American people along with us. It's not enough just to impose rules on them, which Senator Feingold has been such a leader on, we've got to figure out how we prevent them from taking advantage of the American people with higher prescription drug costs, with higher energy costs, with lost jobs that go overseas. This is a job for all of us, not just for our next president. We have to have a coalition that takes on all of these interests. I have an aggressive agenda that will save the American people at least 55 billion dollars a year. If we impose that windfall profits tax, if we get aggressive in going after the oil companies who always seem to be raising the price no matter what else is going on. If we rein in health insurance, rein in drug costs, we can begin to end these subsidies that have unfortunately shifted so much wealth away from the middle class. That's the kind of America that we have to build again. It's not going to be easy but it's doable. It's going to take strength and experience, something that goes along with the job. Change is going to happen. The question is, are we going to get the right kind of change. Because what I'm interested in is not just change for the sake of change, but progress. The kind of progress that will make a difference in the lives of the people of this country.

And we know pretty well what the Republicans will do because they're likely nominee will be Senator McCain. He's a man whom I consider a friend and whom I deeply respect for his lifetime of service to our country. He's a good man with the wrong ideas. And I believe we need a nominee who can go toe-to-toe with John McCain to make the differences absolutely clear to the American people. He wants to keep troops in Iraq for 50 to 100 years. I'll start bringing them home within 60 days.

He's admitted he doesn't understand the economy. Well, I have a strategy to end the housing crisis. When that young girl and her mother came up, I told them I'd been pushing on a moratorium on home foreclosures. End the home foreclosures for 90 days. Let people work out a chance to stay in their homes, have the lenders understand that somebody paying $600 is better than an empty house because they couldn't pay $1000.

Senator McCain won't deliver universal health care. I'm the only candidate left in either party with a plan to cover every single American. And these are big differences.

So Wisconsin Democrats have a choice on Tuesday. It's not an easy choice. I recognize that. It's kind of a good problem to have in a way because either Senator Obama or I will make history and we'll make history because of all that we are able to exemplify, everything that was done to bring both of us to this point. But the question is not who will make history, but who will change America. Who will bring about the positive differences, the 21st century solutions that we so desperately need? I think that the choice is really whether we're going to have a fighter, a doer and a champion again in the White House, somebody who gets up every single day with determination, backbone and, yes, toughness.

I know some people have said that I am tough. You know what? We need a tough president because we have tough problems waiting for us.

When I say I'll stand with you, I will stand with you. When I say I will fight for you, I will fight for you. That's what I've done my whole life. When I started my career fighting for abused and neglected children and children with disabilities, I was standing with the children who had drawn the short straw in life. Well I'm still standing with them today. When I went to Beijing as first lady, I stood up for the core American value that women's rights are human rights and human rights are women's rights.

I took that message to more than 80 countries, to women who couldn't vote or own property or earn a salary or send their daughters to school. And I'm still standing for women's rights and human rights. When I took on the special interests to try to bring health care to every American back in 1993, the insurance companies and the lobbyists came at me with everything they had. But I'm still here and I'm still standing up to the special interests and I am still standing and fighting for health care for every man, woman and child.

When the Republicans come after our nominee, and you know they will -- now I personally believe they should be so embarrassed by the failed record of President Bush that they should say they won't field a candidate, but I'm afraid they will -- and so once again we know exactly what they will do. They'll throw everything they've got at whichever one of us is nominated. Well, I've been through it, I've beaten it, I'm still standing and I will beat them again if I am your nominee.

If you stand with me on Tuesday, then come January 20th, 2009 I will be standing on the steps of the Capitol and I will be expressing for all of us our passionate commitment to this country and what it stands for. Our belief that we may have been on a detour from our destiny but we are back on the right track and that with all of us together we can turn this country around. We are a nation of idealists, holding fast to our deepest values, that we are all created equal, that this generation of Americans is destined for greatness, that every child deserves to fulfill his or her God-given potential.

It's the ideal that is inscribed on the base of the Statue of Liberty, the words that give voice to America's embrace, "give me your tired, your poor, your huddled masse yearning to breath free." Lady Liberty has overlooked the New York harbor through wars and depression and the dark, dark day of September 11th -- a constant reminder that here in America we face our challenges and we embrace all of our people.

So tonight, let us say with one voice, "give us the child who wants to learn, give us the people in need of work, give us the veterans who need our care, give us this economy to rebuild and this war to end, give us this nation to heal, this world to lead, this moment to seize." I know that the people of Wisconsin and America are ready to meet that challenge.

Thank you all very, very much and God bless you.

Good afternoon. This is, as every day is, the day that the lord hath made so let us rejoice and be glad in it. It is a great honor for me to be here with all of you today. I want to thank Dr. Shaw for his leadership; I want to thank Reverend Thurston for his, as well. Dr. T. DeWitt Smith Jr. for his stewardship and leadership and Dr. P.T Robertson. These four leaders, bringing people together today, deserve our appreciation and our prayers. It is a challenging but necessary endeavor.
I should begin by acknowledging that my husband is a Baptist and I have learned during our marriage from sitting around the kitchen table that Baptists have quite the tradition of disagreement. Bill and I have been talking and debating since we first met over thirty-five years ago. Sometimes the decibel level can rise, depending on the passion of the moment, but as you know, that is how we learn - by exploring our differences. By coming to understand that what we share is so much bigger than what separates us. That is how we come to a place of unity and that is what you are doing here, this week. I understand that this is only the second time that the four conventions have come together as one. You are here guided in the spirit of hope by the one who is faithful to us in all things.

As we gather today I am reminded of the scripture from Hebrew, which tells us, "Let us hold unswervingly to the hope we profess, for he who comes is faithful and let us consider how we may serve one another on towards love and good deeds. Let us not give up meeting together - as some are in the habit of doing - but let us encourage one another and all the more as you see the day approaching."

I grew up in a different faith tradition, as a Methodist. I know there is at least one bishop from my tradition here who came to show solidarity. I appreciate that. Much like all of you, I was taught from a very early age that my faith carried with it certain obligations. It was my youth minister who took us to see Dr. King preach about our responsibility to our fellow citizens. It was that famous sermon, staying awake though the revolution. It transformed my life as it did so many others who had the great honor to hear directly from Dr. King the calling to be more than on our own, any of us could be.

I have been a praying person, luckily, my entire life. I'm often asked whether or not I am. I am quick to tell people that I was raised by parents who were prayerful and by a church that guided me but had I not been a praying person, one week in the White House would've turned me into a praying person.

Everyday I try to act on the lessons of my faith, to reach that higher place. Yet, so often, like all of us, I fall short. But each new day, I keep striving and praying to work harder, to correct my imperfections, to improve on the day before and on the day before that. That's what I've tried to do in my personal life but also in every aspect of my public life. That's how I try to go about the work of breaking barriers and expanding opportunities. Work that I, myself have benefited from throughout my life. That is how I practice my faith. I'm living by the scripture that says we are all members of God's household. That we are called, not asked, not urged, not requested, nor ordered, but called to love one another as Jesus has loved us.

Now, I'm not talking about love that comes easy. I'm not talking about the greeting card kind of love. I'm talking about the kind of love that is hard. The deeper, more powerful love in Corinthians that bears all things, believes all things, hopes all things, endures all things.

I'm talking about the kind of love that we have seen in action. The love that fills the heart of my friend, Congressman John Lewis, a man that lead the march in Selma that ended with tear gas, hoses and the crack of the nightstick against his skull as he knelt down to pray. As he knelt down the pray, that nightstick came up and down on a praying man's head. That was just one of the many times John was attacked on his journey for justice. But those of us know John Lewis know that he doesn't harbor hate in any fiber of his being. That's the kind of love I'm talking about.

I'm talking about the love that fills the heart of President Nelson Mandela. I've had the honor of getting to know him over the years and I attended his inauguration. I will never forget how he stood up on that stage and said how proud he was to welcome all of the dignitaries in attendance, but there were three people he especially wanted to welcome. Then he asked three of his jailers from Robin Island to stand. After twenty-seven years in prison at hard labor, he invited them to share that day. He later told me that, "I knew if I didn't leave my bitterness and hatred behind, I'd still be in prison." That's the kind of love I'm talking about.

Our faith calls us to do what is hard, to give voice to the voiceless, to lift up the poorest of the poor and the sickest of the sick. But for the past seven years, our leaders have gotten wrong. They've gotten it upside down and backwards.

They have given corporate tax breaks to Wall Street and then cut Head Start, child care and drop out prevention. They have lifted up the drug and insurance companies, but vetoed health care for millions of children in need. They have given tax breaks to the oil companies but cut off home heating assistance for our seniors this winter. They have waged a war in Iraq that has taken more than 3,900 of our sons and daughters. But they also regret the poverty, the disease and violence that afflict our brothers and sisters here at home and around the world.

Every day you perform good work rooted in the values of our faith. Isn't it a shame when we have leaders that talk a lot about values, but then go and do exactly the opposite in betrayal of those same values. It reminds me of what the writer, Elie Wiesel, once observed: The opposite of love is not hate; it is indifference. And for the past seven years, that's what we have seen in Washington, an epidemic of indifference. A collective turning of our government's back on the least among us. It is in every way possible the opposite of love.

When our children attend schools that are separate and unequal in the 21st century, when anyone votes on a broken machine and their vote isn't counted, that is the opposite of love. When we see nooses hung in a school yard, when the screams of Selma and Montgomery are butted by the nightmare of Katrina and Rita, that is the opposite of love. When some members of God's household have every advantage while others are shut out of the circle of opportunity, that is the opposite of love.

While we may have an income gap and a health gap, and an achievement gap, there is one thing we don't have - a potential gap. It is time we gave every single child in this country the chance to live up to his or her God-given ability and potential. That is what I have strived to do for 35 years. With your help we will continue to make that real.

It is time to reach out and embrace those of the margin and in the shadows. To usher them back to speech at the table in God's household. To ensure that their voices are once again heard in this country. Too many of our fellow citizens feel invisible. They come to up to me, as a woman did today in Little Rock, and said, Senator, what am I to do? I can't get the cancer treatment for my chemotherapy anymore-- I can't afford it and they won't pay for it. It's keeping me alive and now I don't know where to turn.

Or the man who stopped me the other day in New York and said, I'm about to lose my job. I've got two children to send to college. Where will I get the help? People feel like their deepest concerns, their love of their families, can no longer any matter to those in the highest positions of power.

Scripture tells us we cannot just be "hearers" of the word we must be "doers". We are told that faith without works is dead. I have lived long enough by now to know that works without faith is just too hard. If you cannot dip into that righteous stream and replenish your soul, it is overwhelming, isn't it. As I look at the work yet to be finished, I believe we are all called upon to be both hearers and doers. We are called to face the inaction, to deliver real solutions to the real problems that our people are facing. That is the affirmation of our love.

I often taught a Sunday School class when I was in Arkansas, and we talked and talked a lot about loving ones neighbor as oneself. I was struck by how absolutely brilliant Jesus was. We really can't love someone if we don't love ourselves, can we. If we don't believe in and have respect for this great gift we have been given, it's hard to reach out and love someone, a neighbor, a friend. Then of course to be called upon to love ones enemy seems totally unrealistic in the world we live in. It's hard enough getting through the day. But it is what we are called to do. We have to put that calling into action, not only in our individual lives but throughout our society.

Let us think about the solutions we can bring about, to give our people hope, but more than hope, results. The tangible evidence that they are no longer invisible, but that their needs, their hurts, their wants, are being tended to. When I say solutions, I mean expanding the earned income tax credit and tying the minimum wage to the congressional wage so that Congress cannot get a raise until the American people do-- especially those who do the hardest work, every day.

I mean investing in clean renewable energy and creating create green collar jobs right here in Atlanta and across America. Jobs that cannot be outsourced, jobs that we can train our young people to do, jobs that will move our dependence on foreign oil and give us a chance to give our economy, our environment, our security once again under America's control. I believe we need to make it abundantly clear that no one that works full time in America should bring home a wage that keeps that person and his family below the poverty line.

Anybody willing to work a fulltime job should have accommodation of income and benefits that lifts them up. That's how we build a strong middle class. When I say solutions I mean tuition tax credits, to open the doors of higher education, more grants, more opportunities for national service so that students can earn money to go to college.

When I say solutions, I mean tax credits to open the doors of higher education. More Pell grants, more opportunities for national service so that students can earn money to go to college. I mean doubling the funding for historically black colleges and universities like Morehouse and Spelman and Clark Atlanta right here. These have been a bridge to the middle class for generations of young people. That bridge has a sign on it: "You can not enter if you don't have the money." That isn't the way it used to be. Some of us are old enough to remember as I am. I got a loan from the federal government when I went to law school. It was about 2% interest so when I graduated I wanted to go work for the Children's Defense Fund and work for Marian Wright Edelman. I didn't want to go to work for a big law firm. I wanted to defend the abused and neglected kids, the kids in the foster care system, the kids without health care and education. But if I had been graduating with tens of thousands of dollars worth of debt, I'm not sure I could have done that.

We need also to offer to young people who graduate with debt the opportunity to do a public service job like teaching or nursing or law enforcement and let them pay off their loans over time so they don't become an indentured servant to these student loan companies that hold them in the thrall of predatory interest rates. Opening the doors of college is not only good for the young people who walk across that bridge, it is essential for the future of our country.

When I say solutions I mean health care for everyone - no exceptions, no excuses - every man, woman, and child to have quality affordable health care because that's the only way we can close the infant mortality gap, close the life expectancy cap, ensure that people get the primary care from a doctor not from an emergency room.

When I say solutions I mean fixing this housing crisis because a house is more than just your greatest source of wealth. It's the center of your family, it's where you make memories and develop relationships. No one should take that away from you because of the subprime abusive practices that so many mortgage lenders engage in without any supervision or oversight from the federal government. We've got to have a moratorium on home foreclosures for ninety days so we can help people stay in their homes. And let's freeze those interest rates for five years so they don't keep going up and forcing more and more people into debt, into foreclosure.

And let's put a cap on the interest rates that credit card companies can charge and tell them they've got to start explaining to people in big print, not little print, what the terms and conditions are. No one should force you into an ocean of debt because your health care costs are going up, your education and energy costs are going up, but your wages aren't.

The average American family has lost $1,000 in income in the last seven years. African American families have lost $2,600. Contrast that with what happened during the nineties when the typical family, including African American families, saw a rise of $7,000 in their income and more people lifted out of poverty than in any time in our countries recent history.

We know how to turn this around but we have to come together to seek common ground wherever possible and to stand our ground whenever necessary.

And if we truly love our brothers and sisters, our sons and daughters, then we will end this war in Iraq that has claimed so many of their lives and injured tens of thousands of them.

And we will care for them when they came home, because I believe if you serve our country, our country should serve you. And you should get the health care, the compensation, the jobs that you deserve. Every day in America hundreds of thousands of our veterans are homeless, are jobless, are being turned away from treatment and health care because there's no space for them. I think we've got to do everything we can to make it clear that we will tend to our veterans starting with our youngest veterans with a 21st century G.I. Bill of Rights for money for college, and home ownership, and a business, all the way back to our oldest veterans. Let's pay particular attention to the Vietnam veterans who fought and served during that conflict who did not get the help and the services that they had earned. And we will restore our moral leadership in the world to ensure that we never fight a war like this again.

Will all of this be easy? Of course not. Will we get it done all at once? No, but we will make our greatest efforts, just as all of you have done. That is at the heart of what brings you together - your work every day on the front lines of our communities addressing some of our most difficult challenges: poverty and hunger, HIV/AIDS and disease, disaster relief and so much more. It is a role that your churches have played throughout our nation's history. Our churches have served as a bedrock of our community, a refuge in times of need, the heart of our great movement for justice. You cannot have the right kind of change without justice. Change happens whether we want it or not - that is a part of life. What we must be committed to is change with justice, change that makes a difference in the lives of every single American.

We know that we have a lot of work to do but I come before you with the hope that this great nation that we love, that has given all of us so much, whose struggles, trials and tribulations over the centuries have both broken hearts and inspired us, that we will once again begin acting like Americans. There isn't anything our nation can't do to heal up the wounds that have been inflicted, make it possible for each and every person to again feel he or she counts. We can do this. We can lift up the spirits of those most in need. And our country deserves a president who rolls up his or her sleeves and joins you as a partner in that work. That is what I wish to do, to work with you to spur not just each other but all Americans towards love and good deeds and to renew the promise of this great nation.

Thank you and God bless America.

"I want to start with a comment or two about the economy. As we saw over night, this is a global economic crisis. It has pushed the Fed for an emergency meeting and by phone with a rate cut this morning in an effort to try to take whatever action can be taken on the monetary side to begin to try to stabilize this situation which is obviously deteriorating.
"I think it's imperative that the following step be taken. The President should have already and should do so very quickly, convene the President's Working Group on Financial Markets. That's something that he can ask the Secretary of the Treasury to do. We don't have any information that he has done so as of last night, but I would urge him to do that. This has to be coordinated across markets with the regulators here and obviously with regulators and central banks around the world.

"Secondly, the meeting that I understand is going to take place today, with respect to a stimulus package, must produce an agreement that can be quickly passed. I have been advocating for some time a package of actions. The one area that I still hear nothing about from the White House of any significance is what will be done to deal with the mortgage crisis. Those of you who have covered me know that I have spoken about this consistently because I believe it is a critical part of what we must do. We need a combination of spending, regulatory action with respect to the housing market, and rebates through the tax system.

"Secondly, it would be incredibly short-sighted not to include those people who do not currently pay income taxes. We have fifty to seventy million people who are seniors on fixed incomes, who are working people who don't make enough money to actually pay income tax, that they have to get some help. Everything I've heard from the White House would leave these people out.

"I think that is a mistake fiscally and it is certainly a tremendous oversight with respect to what these families and individuals are going through. I would reiterate my call for a moratorium on foreclosures for ninety days and a rate freeze for five years to try to stabilize this housing market. There may be other ways to do it such as opening up the bankruptcy code, which I would certainly be open to, but we've got to address this big piece of business.

"Finally, I think that as we look at what is happening in the economy, it's very important to recognize how the policies of the last seven years have contributed to the situation we find ourselves in. There is no doubting my mind that the American consumer has largely sustained the global economy. What's happening in a lot of these markets around the world is that the fear that the American consumer will stop spending has moved like a contagion through the global markets because, clearly, we have not only spent at extraordinary levels in the federal government, with all of the spending that we haven't paid for and that, I think, is coming home to roost, as well.

"The American consumer, because of he increasing costs of everything that makes up a middle class life or just making it day by day – health care, education, energy costs – have all gone up because of the failures of this administration. We need action across the board and it's imperative that the President and his economic team instill confidence in the competence of our government to take on what is clearly now a global crisis that could very well thrust us into a deep, long recession. We've got to do everything we can to avoid that."

Thank you! Thank you all so much! Thank you. You know, I am so happy to be back here at Furman. I was at Furman with Dick and Chucky Riley back in 2003 for a speech and a question and answer program there, and I had such a wonderful time. It's great to be here again; I've been at one of the extension buildings of the university in this campaign, but to be back and talking about the economic challenges facing our country is a great honor.
I am so sorry to be late. I apologize for that. Some of it was us off to a late start, but there were other things we had to deal with, and some of it was delays in air travel, but I appreciate your patience and your willingness to be here. I apologize for everybody stuck outside; we have a long, long line of people who can't get in. I'm not sure that everybody thought a speech about the economy would draw such a big crowd. So, I apologize to all of you as well.

And of course, I want to thank Dick Riley for his years of service to the state of South Carolina and to our country. He is such a unique public servant and a wonderful, great man.

And I want to thank Frank Holleman who was out speaking here with you before, and Lottie Gibson. State Representative Fletcher Smith, who I'm proud to have supporting me. I want to thank the conference center here and Kay Cornelison, who is the director and all of you who have come.

I particularly want to thank a group of veterans who are traveling throughout the state on my behalf. We have them all over the state. We have several of them here today, led by Hershel Gober, the former Secretary of Veteran Affairs; Hank Naughton, an Iraq veteran and a state representative from Massachusetts; Pat Lewis, another veteran; Reverend Tim Brown, another supporter. I'm very honored to have the support of so many of our veterans.

We have a lot of work to do on that front, and if you want to know the details talk to Hershel and the veterans who are here, because they can give you chapter and verse about what we need to do to keep faith with our veterans.

But I want to turn to the economy.

You know, in just a few days, on Monday night, President Bush will give his final State of the Union Address.

It's enough to make you want to burst out in song. Don't worry, I'll spare you. You don't have to listen to me sing.

After seven years of inattention, neglect and denial, this Monday night, President Bush may well actually discuss the serious economic problems we face. And it's about time.

You know, we didn't hear from him when the typical family incomes dropped $1,000 over the past seven years -- $2,600 for African American families. As health care premiums nearly doubled, gas prices more than doubled, and college costs here in South Carolina rose 124% since 2000, the fastest increase in America.

We didn't hear from him as more than two million foreclosure notices went out – 11,000 properties right here in South Carolina are in some stage of foreclosure. That's 11,000 families that are facing the potential loss of the American dream.

We didn't hear from him as unemployment reached a two year high last month, with South Carolina having the third highest unemployment rate in America, or as nearly five million Americans fell back into poverty – 33,000 in South Carolina alone.

But now, finally, the President may acknowledge what the American people have known for years: that the economy is not working for middle class and working families. And I welcome the president to this conversation. Because it's a conversation that Americans have been having and that I've been having with so many people every day for years. I've listened to the voices of so many Americans as I've traveled the country. The voices of people who work hard all day – then sometimes additionally on the night shift – but it's still not enough. People who whisper to me about the mortgages they can't afford and the homes they're losing, about medical bills that wiped them and their savings out. About tuition costs that have cut short the hopes they had about sending a child to college. Many people are simply overwhelmed by the economic conditions they confront every day.

I've heard from plenty of people who also tell me, "I'm OK right now, but what about next year – or even next month? The way things are going with people losing jobs and homes, what if my family is next?"

This is a time of uncertainty and growing anxiety. We didn't wind up here by accident. As President Kennedy once observed, "Economic policy can result from government inaction as well as governmental action." We're here in part because the President failed to listen to the voices of people who are hurting, failed to get involved in the actual work of running the government, and failed to act. Instead, he has stayed at a comfortable cruising altitude, well above the realities of people's lives, delegating responsibilities to his advisers, hoping the buck would stop somewhere else—anywhere else.

In just seven years, this Administration has taken us from record surpluses into a large and growing deficit, from a projected $5.6 trillion surplus to a $9 trillion debt. We have seen our growing, thriving economy that created 22.7 million jobs in the 1990s pushed to the brink of recession.

And we're seeing the ripple effects around the world. This week, many countries saw their largest one-day stock market declines since September 11, 2001.

In this new century, the stakes have never been higher. The challenges have never been bigger or more urgent. But the opportunities are also there, if we get about the business of seizing them.

Now, our economic problems are admittedly complex. But there is one thing we know for sure: the problem with our economy is not the American people. Instead, the problem is, in part, the bankrupt ideas that have governed us for the last seven years. They have rewarded the very few at the expense of the many.

The American people are actually the solution to our economic problems. Americans are the hardest working people in the world – our productivity goes up every year. That means we work harder and harder and produce more. People are innovators, they are entrepreneurs, they take risks, they start small businesses. They are constantly thinking about the future. The factory worker and the CEO, the farmer or the small business owner, the scientist in the lab, or the teacher in the classroom, everybody who gets up every day and gets their job done, supports their families – that is the strength of the American economy.

And it's time we finally had a president who worked as hard for you as you work for America every single day.

Because, in the end, it is all about people. It is all about the woman in Columbia who grabbed my hand and said that her child was sick and the insurance company wouldn't pay for the treatment that was necessary. It's all about the man in Florence some months ago who came up to me some months ago and said, "I just keep working harder and harder and I feel like I'm falling further and further backwards. But I have a small business; I depend on transporting my goods, and the cost of energy just keeps going up." It's about the real lives of real people right here in South Carolina.

The presidency matters more now than ever. We need a president who will run the government and manage the economy. American people don't hire a President to talk about our problems but to solve them, to set a vision for the future, and then to roll up our sleeves and get about fulfilling it.

It's time for a President who believes that leading an economic comeback is a fulltime, hands-on job. Who renews our commitment to a strong and prosperous middle class and brings business, labor and government together to restore America's competitiveness in a fast changing world. A president who has a vision for a twenty-first century economy based on shared prosperity. Where we measure our success not by the wealth at the very top but by how broadly wealth is shared.

You know, with all due respect to a lot of my friends on the other side of the aisle, I do not believe it is rich people who made America great. I believe it is the hard working people of America who made our country great.

We want to get back to rewarding hard work. We want the American Dream to be within everyone's reach. We want to make investments in one another that allow us, particularly our children, to live up to our God-given potential.

These are not just economic issues, these are moral issues about our common purpose as a nation. Whether people can provide for their families, whether they can share in the blessings of this great country – that speaks to who we are as a people and what we value.

The way we bring our country together is by acting on our values. True unity can only be achieved by finding real solutions for the American people, and then delivering them. Without real solutions, division and disappointment, not unity, will be the result. We've been there before. President Bush promised to be a uniter, not a divider. And we know how well that turned out.

Because unity comes from taking on the tough challenges, asking us to be bigger than ourselves, summoning up to greatness, again. And that is what I intend to do as President, on day one. I will bring the voices of the American people back to the White House. I will ask all of us to be involved in solving our problems.

Otherwise, here is what I fear. Most of us, as I look around this room, with the exception of the students who are crowded into the foyer and spilling out the door, we have been the beneficiaries of the sacrifices that came from previous generations- from parents and grandparents, from people who fought the wars, and built big businesses, and did the labor, who created the extraordinary success of that America is. We have to keep faith with all that came before us. I don't think any of us want to be part of the first generation of Americans to leave our country worse off than when we found it. That would be such a breach with what American history has meant to all of us.

So the time for waiting is over and the time for talk is over. Too many families are paying the price of inaction, right here and right now – so I think we need to begin acting, and we can't wait until January 20, 2009.

We need both an immediate, short-term plan to jumpstart the economy – and a long-term economic vision with strategies to keep the economy going well into the future.

So let's start with the short-term. If I were President right now, I would work with the Congress to jumpstart the economy by immediately addressing the housing crisis, creating new jobs, and getting money back into the pockets of the American people.

We know that the loss of a home is devastating and so many families across our country are facing that. But it's not only those who are actually losing their homes I worry about. Because of this mortgage crisis, every home owner is losing value in our homes. The American people have lost more than $1.3 trillion worth of value in our homes in the last year – that's nearly half the size of the entire United States government budget. And African American families are especially hard hit – subprime loans are five times more common in predominantly African American neighborhoods than predominantly white ones.

But this is not just an economic crisis, it is truly an American dream crisis. Your home isn't just your only greatest source of wealth – it's your greatest source of security. It's what anchors us to our neighborhoods and communities. It's where we raise our kids, celebrate birthdays and holidays, and make memories together. I have visited with so many people in their homes and I know what our homes mean to us. I know the feel of refuge and security I feel when I walk into my own home. I know what it's like to sit in homes where families haven't had the money to buy all the furniture they need but they're so proud to show off their new home.

And nearly a year ago, I called for immediate action to address this mounting mortgage crisis. Less than two weeks after that, the Bush administration told Congress that what I was calling for wasn't necessary- that the problem was contained. Several months later, the President assured us that there would be a soft landing for the housing market. But now we know better. So all of last year, I proposed policies to help families keep their homes. I wrote to the regulators urging them to take their heads out of the sand and do something for the millions of families at risk of foreclosure. I introduced legislation to crack down on abusive lending practices and give states the resources to help at-risk families avoid losing their homes.

The result? A plan from President Bush that lets banks off the hook and leaves homeowners to fend for themselves. In the words of one expert, the President's plan was "the bank lobby's dream." This Administration has delivered a foreclosure notice on the American Dream.

The President's plans to fix our economy would do next to nothing about the foreclosure crisis. And they said that my insistence on stopping foreclosures just doesn't make sense. Well I'm sorry to disagree. The housing crisis is contributing to rising unemployment. Construction jobs are disappearing— and I see a few hard-hats here in the audience. South Carolina alone lost 2,800 construction jobs in 2007. It's erasing families' wealth, jeopardizing consumer spending, which constitutes two-thirds of our economy. It's caused $100 billion in losses to banks, making them less likely to offer credit to businesses and families that need it.

That's why my plan to fix the economy starts by doing everything possible to ensure that we don't lose any more homes and that we stabilize the economy when it comes to the mortgage crisis.

I want to start with a 90-day moratorium on foreclosures. If the bank is about to foreclose on your home, you should have some breathing room to restructure your mortgage. I'm calling for freezing the monthly rate on adjustable rate mortgages for at least five years or until the mortgages have been converted into loans that families can afford. If you have an adjustable mortgage that's about to skyrocket, you'll have the chance to pay it off with affordable payments.

People say well isn't this rewarding people who maybe got in over their heads? Well to some extent it is trying to stop what is happening that will affect all of us. If we don't help these families work out their mortgages now we will have more empty homes because the housing market is so low right now, nobody is buying. Then we'll have deteriorating neighborhoods, then we'll have decreasing tax revenues for cities and towns- it becomes a vicious cycle.

That's why I also would also create a $30 billion fund to help hard-hit communities and distressed homeowners weather the foreclosure crisis. We need to be sure to shore up our communities so that they don't begin to also deteriorate in the face of a loss in the home market. I also would include direct tax rebates to working and middle class families. We need to target it to those who are most in need.

The Democratic leadership in the House and Senate along with the White House appear to be nearing a deal and I am heartened to hear that they are planning to extend assistance to the tens of millions of working Americans who need it the most. That's what I have been calling for and that's what I think we have to do. But I also want to target the needs of working families that are really facing tough choices. We need relief from skyrocketing energy bills. We need expanded unemployment insurance for those who are struggling to find a job.

But I want to think about the future, that's why I would take immediate steps to spur "green collar" job growth: High-wage, renewable energy jobs that are good for our environment and cannot be outsourced.

I would do this immediately through a crash weatherization program that would put people to work, helping to insulate homes, and give green collar job training initiatives to help prepare people.

I would also implement my Green Building Fund to rebuild and renovate schools and other public buildings to help make them more energy efficient. We can create millions of new jobs in America through clean, renewable energy. I know we can do it because I've seen what other countries have done.

Germany decided a few years ago to make a big bet on solar power. They creating tax incentives, they created training programs to take construction workers and others to know how to install solar panels. They have created several hundred thousand new jobs in three short years. They have a smaller economy than ours. If we got serious about this, I know we could do the same. I really hope that as part of this recovery package, we start getting serious about the future. We have to stop the crisis but then we have to plan for an economy that will keep generating good new jobs, and clean energy is our best bet.

But jumpstarting the economy in the short-term is just the beginning. We need a long-term vision to build a strong, prosperous economy for the next generation. I think it was Winston Churchill who said that, the difference between a politician and a statesman is that the politician thinks about the next election, while the statesman thinks about the next generation. We've got to start thinking about the next generation. We can't do this piecemeal; we've got to start helping people more.

Maybe you want to start saving for retirement, but you can't do it because your taxes are too high and your wages aren't high enough. Maybe you want to go back to school, but your health care premiums are too high so you can't afford tuition.

We live in a complex, interconnected, global economy. All of our challenges are all together now. We can't just put band-aids on one and expect to solve our problems. What we have to do is have a plan to create good jobs and restore fairness to the economy. We need to renew the promise of America that if you work hard, you can get ahead. We need to return to fiscal responsibility, so that Washington once again lives within a budget, just like you and your family has to do.

I believe solving the jobs crisis over the long run starts with solving the energy crisis. That's why I will create a $50 billion Strategic Energy Fund to jumpstart investments in clean energy technologies. We will create a green revolution with investments in biofuels, wind, solar, geothermal, all of the clean energy and energy efficiency changes we need to make. And as we create these new job possibilities for the next generation we will pay for it by eliminating the tax subsidies for the big oil companies and require them to pay into the Strategic Energy Fund, or invest in alternative energy themselves. They have made record profits in recent years. Now it's time they did their fair share.

I also know that we won't get any of this done until the two oil men leave the White House but as soon as they do, we will start to work on this long-term vision.

We also help create jobs by modernizing and rebuilding our crumbling infrastructure. The tragic bridge collapse in Minnesota this past summer, a recent levee break in Nevada, and what happened with the levees in New Orleans are painful reminders that our infrastructure is in dangerous disrepair.

Every billion dollars that we spend fixing crumbling infrastructure creates 48,000 new jobs. I have a Rebuild America Plan to invest $10 billion over ten years in an "Emergency Repair Fund." We need to modernize our ports, our rail systems, our airports, our public transit systems, our bridges, our tunnels, our roads. We need to expand access to broadband across America, particularly to rural areas.

We need to end this Administration's war on science and restore America to its rightful place. As the innovation nation, I will increase investments in basic and applied research at the National Science Foundation, the National Institutes of Health and our other government agencies and universities. We became so successful after World War II because business and science worked hand in hand with government. Our great universities like Furman were on the cutting edge of discoveries that we translated into better outcomes for people.

But creating jobs is just the beginning. We need to empower our workers and ensure that our tax system is fair. That's the second piece of a long-term plan.

For the past seven years, the oil companies, the predatory student loan companies, the insurance companies, the drug companies have had a president who stands up for them. I intend to be a president who stands up for you every single day about how we make America work better for you.

During the 1950s and 60s which many of us look back at with great appreciation because the economy worked so well, for so long, for so many, we had a much higher percentage of our workforce unionized. Now it is much lower. We need to make sure people can organize and bargain for good wages and safe working conditions.

We need to be sure that we restore fairness to the economy by restoring fairness to the tax code. Right now, some of the people I represent in New York City, Wall Street investment managers, making $50 million a year pay just 15% on their earnings – while a teacher making $50,000 pays 25%. I don't think that's right and I've been calling to raise the taxes on those people at the top.

As corporate profits have skyrocketed, the percentage of taxes paid by corporations has fallen. We have richly rewarded people and I am all in favor of incentivizing people to do well. That is part of what America stands for. But it isn't right that the wealthy and the well-connected have gotten so many more benefits than the middle class and working people have.

We need to extend middle class tax cuts, including the child tax credit, marriage penalty relief. We need to reform the Alternative Minimum Tax to ensure it doesn't hit middle class families with higher tax rates. It was never supposed to do that. We need to expand the Earned Income Tax Credit and raise the minimum wage to ensure that work pays for all Americans. No one who works full time should live in poverty. If you're working full time you shouldn't be in poverty.

We need to give people the tools and support they need to succeed in today's complex economy. That starts with recommitting ourselves to making college affordable for our young people. That's especially important here in South Carolina, the average student debt upon graduation is $20,000. So you start in a big hole before you ever go to work on the first day. And you know what's happened which is really troubling to me—America's higher education system which was the envy of the world, we had an open system, the highest percentage of young people who went to get degrees, but now from Japan to South Korea to Canada and Ireland, other countries are educating their young people at a higher rate than here in America. The reason for that is the cost has exploded. It is more expensive today than it was thirty years ago to send a child to college.

That's why I've outlined a comprehensive plan to open the doors of college to young people. It includes a new $3,500 college tax credit that will cover more than 50% of the typical cost of public colleges and universities or the full cost of tuition and fees for community colleges.

I also want to increase the size of Pell Grants, something that former Secretary Riley mentioned. I want to strengthen community colleges, invest $500 million to support innovative, on-the-job training and apprenticeship programs for those who don't go to college.

We also have to ensure that every American has quality, affordable health care. Here in South Carolina alone, 672,000 people are uninsured. I want to ask you— how many of you know someone here in South Carolina who is uninsured? How many of you know somebody who may have insurance but it just doesn't pay for what the doctor or the hospital says you need?

We have two problems—we have the problem of the uninsured and the problem of the underinsured. My American Health Choices Plan would insure every single person for what they need.

It's simple: If you have insurance you like, you keep it. There is no disruption. If you have a good policy through your business or through a union or through a municipality, nothing changes. But if you don't have insurance – or you don't like the insurance you have – you can choose from the same menu of private plans available to members of Congress. And we will provide tax credits to help you afford it.

My plan also bans insurance company discrimination, so you will never be denied coverage because of pre-existing conditions or risk factors that you might have. And we don't require small business to do anything but it does provide tax credits to help small businesses if they choose to afford to buy health care for their employees.

Finally, we have to help more Americans save for a secure retirement. Right now, fewer than half of all Americans have any retirement savings account at all. When I'm President, I want to provide every single American with an easy, automatic opportunity to save for the future through "American Retirement Accounts." These accounts will take the best of the 401k plans and make them available to every working family. And we'll give families up to $1,000 in tax cuts to help them save.

And finally we've got to return to fiscal responsibility.

Year after year, the President has increased spending at more than double the rate of the previous administration and handed tax cut after tax cut to multi-millionaires, oil companies and other interest groups. And how has he paid for all of this spending? By borrowing money from foreign countries like China. When people ask me, why is it hard to get tough on China and enforce our trade agreements, I tell them: because they're our bankers. We owe them. How can we truly enforce the trade laws against a country like China, when our economy depends on China's massive loans to us? Think about it this way, we borrow money from China to buy oil from the Saudis. That is a dead-end strategy for America. And I'm going to end that strategy if I have the good fortune of becoming your president.

Because I want America to regain control of its destiny by moving back toward a balanced budget and a surplus. That's why I've worked throughout this campaign to show exactly how I would pay for every initiative that I have just mentioned. Not just how I'll run my campaign, but run our country as well.

You know, today, some people around the world and even some here at home are basically saying, "Well, we can't go back to the kind of economy we had before." They act as though the 1990s was ancient Rome. It worked well in the 1990s. The average American family had a $7,000 gain in income in the 1990s.

Well, every election is about the future but I do think there are lessons we need to learn from the past. Because right now, we are on the wrong track. We are undermining our security at home and around the world. We are undermining the American dream here at home.

You know, great presidents have always understood the greatness of the American people. Think about President Franklin Roosevelt. Faced with a Depression, grave threats to America's freedom, he responded with bold solutions. Yes, they were sometimes controversial, but we rose from economic chaos and despair and at the time he died we were months away from winning a World War. He didn't paint a rosy scenario. He didn't ignore the tough challenges. He urged us to confront them. "We have a great many problems ahead of us," he said. "And we must approach them with realism and courage." He believed we could tackle our greatest challenges, and I believe exactly the same. We have to overcome the fear and fatalism that President Bush has used to divide us and set us against one another.

When I sometimes here the President or the Vice President, I don't hear America talking. You know, "we can't solve the energy crisis without wrecking our economy; we can't provide affordable quality healthcare without wrecking our healthcare system; we can't have an economy anymore that creates a rising standard of living for everybody willing to work hard."

Since when did America become the can't-do country? That is not the America we know and love. We are going to face the future with our optimism, with our faith, our belief that we can overcome any challenge. I am optimistic. I know we are facing some tough, tough issues. I think about it every day. I'm asking the people of South Carolina to take a chance on me, just like I asked the people of New York to take a chance on me back in 2000. I came and said, "If you will give me a chance, I will work my heart out for you. You will have someone who gets up every day, thinking about you. I am not a show horse, I'm a work horse; and I will go to work for you."

But I'm not going to do it alone. I can't do it alone. We all have to be in this together. You know, when I talk about a clean, green renewable energy future, I'm going to ask all for you to be more energy efficient, to think about what it means when you keep the lights on, when you drive more than maybe you need to, making three trips to the mall instead of one sensible one. I want you to think about every time you fill up the gas tank, or leave those lights on, you're sending money to oil companies and oil producing countries that don't always have our best interests at heart.

When I say we need a new approach to healthcare that provides quality, affordable healthcare for every American, I'm going to ask you to take better care of your health and the health of your children. Because we can have the best health care system in the world but we've got to be healthier. We've need a system of wellness, not one that just intervenes with sickness. We've got to be once again the American people that are on the front lines of change and progress together.

We are the oldest democracy in the world for a reason. Because whenever times are tough, whenever the challenges are big and the stakes are huge. We always respond.

Now, Winston Churchill also said that the American people finally get around to doing the right thing after trying nearly everything else. Well, we've tried nearly everything else over the last seven years, and I think we've learned our lesson. So now what we need to do is face the future realistically, courageously, confidently, and optimistically.

I know we can do this together. I need your help in the primary on Saturday. I need you to vote not just for me but for yourselves, your family, and your future. I am ready to lead on day one, and if you give me that opportunity, we will restore pride and progress in our country together.

Thank you all very, very much.

Thank you all so much. Thank you Senator Hogg. Thank you all for being here. This is such an exciting day because we are in this facility being part of the future that we will make together for our country. I want to thank Senator Hogg because he has campaigned on climate change, he has campaigned on renewable energy, he's campaigned on the future we need for our children.
And I'm thrilled to have so many others here with me today. I want to thank County Supervisor Jim Houser. I want to thank Justin Shields from the Hawkeye Labor Council. I want to thank State Representative Swati Dandekar, I want to thank State Representative Todd Taylor. I want to thank my dear friend Christie Vilsack who's with me and I want to especially thank Clipper Windpower because other people are talking and you're doing. You're making it happen.

I have been looking forward to being here because I know how important it is that those of us who are running for President, asking the good people of Iowa for your support, that we tell you what we will do when we're President to deal with the big problems facing America. And today I want to focus on energy and climate change.

Two years ago as part of a bipartisan congressional delegation, I traveled to Barrow, Alaska. That's the northern most point of the United States. And I also traveled through on my way there the Yukon Territory in Canada. Traveling over those vast coniferous forests that blanket those harsh unforgiving latitudes, I looked down to see dead trees as far as the eye could reach. These trees are part of an ecosystem formed to survive brutal conditions. But the giant spruce trees of the Yukon, some centuries old, are no match for a relative newcomer: a tiny insect known as the bark beetle. The forests, it turns out, were once protected by cold, cold winters. The beetle could not survive. But warmer temperatures have allowed this invasive species to travel into higher latitudes and wreak unnatural havoc. In once pristine forests, there was devastation. Millions of acres infested. Whole swaths of land - once green - now brown.

When we arrived in Barrow, virtually everyone I spoke to had a personal wake up call about what was happening in the climate. A visit to a boyhood watering hole revealed a dried up lakebed. A native village uprooted by erosion. I met lifelong participants in dogsled races who told me they no longer even needed to wear gloves during those races. At the top of the world, you hear stories -- affirmed by decades of scientific investigation -- of changing weather patterns, melting ice, retreating glaciers, unprecedented wildfires, eroding coasts, and invasive species. You can see the evidence with your own eyes. There are no climate change skeptics inside the Arctic Circle.

Of course, this is a story about a place thousands of miles from here, in one of the most remote regions of our planet. But I share it because it is not an isolated experience any longer. It is a part of our story. It is part of Iowa's story and America's story. Alarming climate changes, a stagnant economy, our health weakened, our national security compromised -- because of our failure to move to a clean, efficient energy future.

It is our story because the climate crisis portends drastic changes to our way of life. The last two decades of the 20th century were the hottest in 400 years. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change found that 11 of the past 12 years are among the warmest since 1850. Rising sea levels along the coastal United States could cost $170 billion in the coming decades. Beyond our shores, you have African countries experiencing water stress, Asian countries contending with increasing flooding.

It's our story because our dependence on foreign oil threatens our economy. America's national and economic security has taken a backseat to the driver's seat. Gas prices have doubled over the past six years. Nationwide, diesel recently hit an all-time high. You know gasoline prices, depending upon where you shop, are around $3 a gallon.

Two thirds of Americans now say that rising gas prices are a hardship for their families. One in four low income families have already missed a mortgage or a rent payment because of rising energy costs.

Meanwhile, we are more dependent on foreign oil today than we were on 9/11. And one third of our trade deficit is the petroleum we import, as we transfer massive amounts of wealth to undemocratic governments that use those funds to stifle opposition and finance extremism.

It's our story because the carbon economy compromises our health, the air we breathe, and the environment in which we raise our children. One study found that pollution from power plants causes 24,000 premature deaths in our country each year. Nearly a third of our childhood asthma cases are caused by air pollution and environmental contamination.

And finally, it's our story because the President has systematically undermined our path to a clean energy future.

Instead of recognizing the irrefutable evidence, this Administration has launched a war on science itself. Political appointees have censored studies on global warming, silenced climate experts. According to a survey by the Union of Concerned Scientists, nearly three fourths of climate experts witnessed inappropriate interference in climate research. And just this past March, the Administration issued a gag order to employees of the Fish and Wildlife Service forbidding them to speak about the plight of polar bears without prior official approval.

Instead of an all out optimistic assault on the problem, the Bush Administration launched an assault on the problem solvers. The President took seven years to recognize climate change. He refused really to engage in talks with other global leaders at the United Nations and even tried to stop individual states from taking their own action to reduce CO2 emissions under the Clean Air Act.

This is the biggest challenge we have faced in a generation. It is a challenge to our economy, to our security, to our health, and to our planet. And it's time for America to meet it. It is time to get back into the solutions business. And that is what America does better than anybody else.



You know, when America confronted a Great Depression, we did not wring our hands. We rolled up our sleeves. Try rolling up your sleeves while you're wringing your hands. It can't be done. And we created the New Deal and invented Social Security. When the Greatest Generation was called upon to save the world from tyranny in World War II, our whole country responded. While young men fought overseas, Americans did their part to support the war effort here at home.

When the Soviet Union launched Sputnik, we didn't minimize the challenge or silence the scientists who wanted to get out and meet it. Instead, within one year, President Eisenhower had created the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency, created NASA, and passed the National Defense Education Act that fostered the next generation of scientists and engineers. Our nation was so united and determined that we answered President Kennedy's call to land an American on the moon and return him safely to earth within the decade.

For this generation of Americans, climate change is our Space Race. It is our home-front mobilization during World War II and it is our response to the Great Depression. According to studies, the negative economic consequences of climate change will affect every part of our country, virtually every sector of our economy, and strain our local governments, cost jobs, and extract a horrific human toll. I'm very proud that Vice President Gore and the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change just won the Nobel Peace Prize for sounding the alarm that all of us must respond to.



There are also security implications. A group of retired 3 and 4-star generals and admirals issued a recent report describing in detail the threat that global warming poses to our national security, from increased conflict over natural resources to instability and migrations. Earlier this year, the Senate passed my legislation to require the Department of Defense to integrate this issue into our planning.

And for those who still believe that we can't afford to tackle climate change, the price of inaction is far higher than the price of action. I believe America is ready to take action, to break the bonds of the old energy economy, to prove that the climate crisis is one of the great economic opportunities in the history of our country. Seizing it will unleash a wave of innovation, create millions of new jobs, enhance our security, and lead the world in a revolution in how we produce and use energy. It can literally be a new beginning for the 21st century.



After 35 years of advocacy on behalf of children and families, I believe solving the climate and energy crisis is critical to leaving our children a world as healthy and welcoming as the one we inherited.



After eight years in the White House and seven years in the Senate, I believe I know how to get the job done. I know that a true American response offers us a way not just to bridge the economic divide, but to heal the partisan divide that has paralyzed our politics and compromised our future. There is something for everyone to do, and success will require each of us do our part. So, if you're ready for change, I am ready to lead.



When I am President, we will set three major energy goals for America.

One, to reduce greenhouse gas emissions 80 percent from 1990 levels by 2050, the amount necessary to avoid the most dangerous and destructive consequences of climate change.



Two, to cut foreign oil imports by two thirds from projected levels by 2030 to move America toward energy independence.

And three, to move us from a carbon-based economy to an efficient, green economy by unleashing a wave of private-sector innovation in clean energy and energy efficiency. I believe that will create at least five million good new jobs from clean energy over the next decade.



Now, how will we achieve these goals? Well, first, as President, I will lead a national commitment to energy efficiency. This is the cheapest, cleanest, fastest way to reduce energy consumption and save energy costs, and to create good new jobs that cannot be outsourced.

The Department of Energy estimates that we can reduce energy use in residential buildings 20% by 2020. We can do better than that I believe. By some estimates all the future growth in energy demand in North America, all of it, could be met through investments in efficiency alone. And we know how to do this.

Since 1970, three-fourths of all new demand has been met simply by using energy more efficiently. Over the past three decades, California has held its electricity use per person flat. In other words, there's been no increase in electricity use per person in the entire state of California for 30 years. They've done it through practical steps in conservation and efficiency.

During the same 30 year period, energy demand in the rest of country, skyrocketed by 50%. California's flat. We've all gone up 50%.

Now, did California get left behind? Did people flee California because it was no longer a good place to live? Just the opposite. It has prospered. A study released earlier this year by the University of California Berkeley found that cutting greenhouse gas emissions to 1990 levels by 2020, through further improvements in efficiency, could create more than 1 million new jobs in California alone. And if American electricity use had fallen at the same rate as California use, our whole country would be using 43% less electricity today. So when I'm President, increasing energy efficiency quickly will be priority one. We will set a goal of reducing electricity demands 20% by 2020.

We must change the way utilities make money. Today the incentives are backwards. The less we conserve, the more carbon we emit, the more money utilities earn. We'll change that with energy efficiency targets for utilities and incentives for saving power instead of generating more of it. This seemingly simple change, called decoupling, has transformational potential because utilities are in the best position to help businesses and families make investments in efficiency. Fourteen states already have some form of efficiency goals for utilities and more utilities are embracing that as well. Decoupling permits a utility to invest in efficiency. Duke Power and other utilities have committed to go beyond that. They are offering energy audits to all of their customers. They're helping their customers come up with plans to cut consumption and to finance the implementation over 20 to 30 years, as if efficiency gains were mini-power plants.

It works like this: the installation of solar power and cold resistant glass and other improvements cut your utility bill 30%. The utility pays the upfront cost of those improvements and then a portion of the efficiency savings goes to you to cut your bills, and the other goes to the utilities to pay off the cost of the improvement.

You get a lower utility bill, they get more power with no more CO2 emissions. In the process a lot of jobs are created - installing the new product, manufacturing, distributing and selling. The system is user friendly, faster, cheaper and more labor-intensive than building a new power plant.

A lot of people who build things for a living, say 'well, but if we don't keep building power plants, we're going to lose jobs.' It's just the contrary. If we're building millions of mini-power plants we're going to create more jobs. That's what I want to see for us. Once we have nationwide decoupling, every utility should implement this type of system and maximize efficiency before building any new power plants.

And that's just the beginning. At your office, you probably have a desktop computer, a thousand times more powerful and half the price than computers available 20 years ago. An i-pod can hold more songs than you can listen to in a month. We can talk to anyone, anywhere, at any time using 21st century information technology, which has transformed our economy. But all of this depends on a power grid all but unchanged in half a century. It is time to start building a 21st century grid.

Right now the system runs on auto-pilot. The only connection between your home and the grid is the power you draw. But what if we harnessed all of the advances in information technology?

Imagine if you could time your air conditioner, or your dishwasher or you dryer to turn on when demand for power was less and the cost lower. Imagine if you could charge your car in your garage at night, and sell power back to the utility when your car is parked at work during the hours of peak energy demand. Imagine if you could sell back the excess power you generate with solar panels on your roof. Imagine if the system could manage the stresses on the grid continuously, cutting peak demand to avoid brown outs, conserve power and save money.

Just a 5% drop in peak demand would save $35 billion in energy costs over 10 years. We can harness this technology. As President I will fund ten "Smart Grid Cities," provide smart grid tax incentives to utilities and encourage state utility commissions to provide incentives as well. We will also make appliances more efficient, saving consumers $54 billion between now and 2030.

You know the EPA's successful Energy Star program provides valuable information to consumers about how to save energy and save money by purchasing more efficient products. Let's take it further and create a Climate Star initiative, to provide consumers with information to compare the carbon footprints of products that they buy.

We will also phase out the incandescent light bulb -- the technology that Thomas Edison pioneered. I think Thomas Edison would support this idea. In fact, he'd probably be there helping us develop the replacements -- from L.E.D.s to compact fluorescents. Compact florescent bulbs - they may look funny - they use a quarter the amount of energy and last 5 to 10 times longer than the typical incandescent bulb. If we move to compact fluorescent, or other equally energy saving alternatives, we will cut our national electric bill by more than $10 billion over just 8 years.

I also want to launch a Green Building Fund to invest $1 billion per year into energy efficiency in public buildings like schools, police stations, firehouses, and offices. We'll help 20 million low-income families modernize their homes to be more energy efficient. Buildings account for 40% of America's carbon emissions -- and there are so many simple, cost effective steps we can take to reduce heating bills, light bills, save taxpayers' money, and cut pollution. In the process we can create hundreds of thousands of new jobs.

I will also create a program called "Connie Mae," that stands for the Carbon Neutral Mortgage Association. This is a great idea that Vice President Gore has championed. The extra cost of thicker insulation and efficient window coatings, for example, are often shunned by builders and buyers looking to save money -- even though these green products actually pay for themselves in lower utility bills. Connie Mae will make it easier for families to secure affordable loans from private lenders to improve the efficiency in their own home. It's a win for the bankers, homebuyers and the planet.

Yesterday night I was at the Great River Medical Center. It's in West Burlington, and I learned it is the most energy efficient hospital in America. This is happening in Iowa right now. It's just happening so rarely and on such an individual basis that we don't realize all of the benefits that we can get. The Great River Medical Center is powered by the world's largest lake-coupled geothermal heating and cooling system. I thought that was pretty neat. Right here in Iowa. The most energy efficient hospital in America.



The second piece of my agenda asks the national government to set the rules and lead the way. As President, I will put in place a market-based cap and trade system to reduce carbon pollution. Here's how it will work: the federal government auctions permits for 100% of the nation's carbon dioxide emissions. Companies purchase those allowances but they can be traded, borrowed, banked, bought, and sold. The market will determine the cost of carbon pollution and companies will be rewarded for cutting emissions.

In combination with efficiency, fuel economy standards and other proposals, this system will ensure we meet our goal of reducing our contribution to global warming below 1990 levels by 80%. We know this can work. It was exactly what we did in the 1990s to reduce acid rain, cutting sulfur dioxide emissions by 10 million tons below 1980 levels. While setting down the rules, the federal government will also set an example. All new federal buildings designed after noon January 20, 2009, when I become President, will have to be carbon neutral -- that is zero emissions. No new federal buildings that don't meet that standard.



I will ask the Department of Housing and Urban Development to strengthen energy efficiency standards for public housing and develop model standards for all new construction. And we will make energy efficiency a core mission for the Government Services Administration, which manages federal buildings.

I also want to help local governments go green. More than 700 mayors have signed a pledge to cut their city's contribution to climate change and meet the standards set by the Kyoto Protocol.

Third, I will ask automakers to play a role. Today, your car may have a CD player, a navigation system and GPS. We have front and side impact airbags, anti-lock brakes, technology that senses tiny changes in road conditions. Henry Ford would be dumbfounded until he opened the hood. Because he would recognize the internal combustion engine underneath. It is the same basic concept that he put in to the Model T almost a century ago. In fact, that Model T got better gas mileage than your typical SUV does today.

We can't continue this. It's time for a change. For two decades, U.S. fuel economy has stagnated. Cars and light trucks account for 40%of the 21 million barrels of oil consumed every day in America. I believe America should do what we do best: lead the innovation race. Imagine if over the past century, we'd advanced as far in powering our cars as we have in keeping our cars safe. As President, I will raise the fuel efficiency standards to 40 miles per gallon by 2020 and 55 by 2030.



That will save consumers more than $180 billion dollars in fuel bills each year and save us 4.5 million barrels of oil each day.

But I'm not going to ask the auto companies to do it alone. I want to be a partner, a good partner, to help them transition to a clean energy future. I'll provide $20 billion in "Green Vehicle Bonds" to help domestic automakers retool their older plants to manufacture new, more efficient cars and trucks. We've also got to invest more in new batteries, transmissions and other technologies. I will create a tax credit to help auto makers cover the legacy health care and retirement costs they face.

Next, we'll accelerate the production of plug-in hybrids. These are vehicles that can be filled up at the gas station and charged up in a standard outlet. A vehicle powered by electricity releases one-third less global warming pollution, even if the electricity comes from coal. These cars can offer the promise of 100 miles to the gallon. And if the plug-in is a flex-fuel vehicle running on E85 ethanol, it could potentially travel 500 miles for every gallon of gas consumed.



Now, the good news is, Detroit is already embracing this existing technology. It is poised to be a world leader. General Motors plans to bring a plug-in hybrid to market in 2010, and Ford is looking at plug-ins as well. But the plug-in revolution can't happen fast enough. As President, I will invest $2 billion in research and development to reduce the cost, improve the capacity and the lifespan of lithium-ion batteries. I will offer consumers a tax credit of up to $10,000 for purchasing a plug-in hybrid. And I want to add 100,000 plug-in hybrids to the federal fleet by 2015.

At the same time, we've got to increase access to public transportation. For every mile you travel on a subway, a bus or a train instead of in a car, you produce 95% less carbon monoxide and half as much carbon dioxide. If we have clean buses, more efficient locomotives, the reductions could even be greater. I want to increase funding for public transit by more than $1.5 billion each year and link that to smart policies that discourage sprawl and congestion.

Fourth, we'll ask the oil companies to do their part. I have proposed a $50 billion Strategic Energy Fund to invest in the clean energy technologies of the future. Here's how we'll pay for it -- by ending the tax breaks that oil companies receive to maintain the existing oil dependence economy.



Oil is now over $90 a barrel. A lot of folks think it's going to get to over $100 a barrel. The oil companies don't need your tax dollars to help them. We're going to give these companies that have made the highest profits in the history of the world a choice: pay into the strategic energy fund or invest more in renewable energy.

We cannot let the middle class pay twice to solve the energy crisis, in higher prices at the pump and in bearing the largest burden of transitioning to a green economy. A portion of the oil companies' profits should also be used to spark the R&D that will help America the world's leader in exporting that technology. I will also require oil companies and other major gasoline retailers to install E85 pumps at half of their stations in the next five years and all of their stations in ten. It's time for the oil companies to become energy companies. That's good for our country and they must begin to do it.

Fifth, we will support the innovative companies, the skilled workers, the creative entrepreneurs and the path-breaking researchers who are driving the next great discovery. Germany, Japan and other countries have surpassed us in the production of solar, wind, geothermal and other vital technologies. We've always been the innovation nation, and it's time for us to lead again. Tomorrow, I will be in Newton outlining my energy jobs agenda. But we need look no further than Clipper Windpower.



In a few short years, Clipper Windpower has set an example of how creating clean energy can create good jobs. This is a 330,000 square foot facility. You employ more than 250 people helping to develop and deploy the next generation of wind technology. Just one of the turbines that will be fueled by these great generators, which is really the brain of the windpower, can power 800 homes without producing any pollution at all.



As President, I will be a good partner for Clipper and for other companies and innovators who are not only contributing to their bottom line and creating jobs, but I think being real patriots.

This is the new challenge. What does it mean to be a patriot for America in the 21st century? End our dependence on foreign oil and an old energy system that undermines our growth and our future.



I will also increase the goal for biofuels to 60 billion gallons by 2030, with almost half of that coming from advanced biofuels like cellulosic ethanol. We will accelerate the production of advanced coal technology. Coal currently provides 50%of our electricity in America, but it comes at a high price in greenhouse gases and other pollutants. We need to accelerate the development and deployment of technology that can safely capture and store carbon dioxide emissions. That is why I will provide funding immediately for 10 large-scale projects.

At the same time, we need to stop building coal plants the way we have in the past. I will require utility commissions to evaluate whether the energy efficiencies that decoupling makes possible can meet expected demand before permitting any new coal plant. In any event, I will require all new coal plants to be built so that capture and storage technology can be added as soon as it is available. I will strongly support a renewable portfolio standard, with 25% of electricity coming from wind, solar, and other renewable sources by 2025.



We have lost so much time in the last years. Today America produces between 2% and 3% of our power through renewable sources. Meanwhile, Denmark plans to meet one half of its energy needs with wind by 2025. Last year, Germany produced half of the world's solar electricity. While these countries provide incentives for energy independence, their companies are exporting new technologies around the world, boosting their economies and creating new jobs. In just the last two years, the German economy added 85,000 new jobs in renewable energy. As a point of comparison, since we have almost four times the population they have; they have 82 million, we have a little over 300 million, we could have added some 300,000 good jobs from the same sources if we had been leading the way instead of dragging our feet.

And clean energy will also improve both the health of our families. Asthma rates are soaring in part because of the way we produce energy. No one, can any longer, ignore the health affects of dirty energy. The International Olympic Committee is considering canceling some events at the 2008 Olympics in Beijing due to poor air quality. So China is now rushing to institute tougher emissions standards to clean up the air before the games begin.

As President, to help us reach 25% by 2025, I will make the production tax credit for wind and solar permanent. No more guessing what you're going to get as you move forward with your production.



I will also provide tax incentives for homes and businesses to install technologies, and establish a national net metering standard -- so, families and companies that install these new technologies can sell power back to the grid for a fair price all over the country.

That happens in some states, but it stops at the border. We need to make it national. Finally, the Strategic Energy Fund I've proposed will double investment in energy research and invest in a new initiative called the Energy Advanced Research Projects Agency. I want to bring together the best minds in the public and private, and academic sectors to think outside the box. If we have the best minds thinking about an alternative to the internal combustion engine, who knows what we would create? We need to be doing this. The agency that helped us win the space race, that literally creating the internet, can be the way we deal with our new energy challenges.

America can lead the world's green revolution. Our entrepreneurial capacity, our capital markets, our research institutions and our skilled workforce are unmatched. We are the best in the world, let's start acting like we're the best again.

[Applause}

This will create at least 5 million jobs. You've heard of white collar jobs. You've heard of blue collar jobs. These will be new "green collar" jobs all across America.



Think about it. Entry level jobs insulating houses and installing green roofs on buildings. High-wage construction jobs modernizing our grid and building green buildings. Farm jobs planting and harvesting bio-energy crops. High-tech bioengineering jobs in cellulosic ethanol. Management jobs in new, clean energy companies. High tech jobs developing new, affordable forms of clean energy. And last but not least, manufacturing jobs building wind turbines, solar panels and other products, just like here at Clipper.



Sixth, shaping our own clean energy future will enable America to play an indispensable role in shaping the world's clean energy future. We can't meet these challenges alone. We could be as clean as all of us hope to be in 10, 15, 20 years, if other countries like China and India are polluting the atmosphere, all of their pollution will get up in the wind currents and fall right down on us. We can't just act like the world doesn't need our leadership the way we have for the last 6 and half years. Other countries like China and India, they see we've done nothing. They feel free, therefore, to do very little. That is not the way we can lead. We have to prove that moving away from a carbon economy is good for growth and lead the world to a new binding agreement to reduce emissions dramatically.

The President's failed unilateral energy policy is a part of our failed unilateral foreign policy. It's deprived us of the credibility and the leverage we need to solve the climate crisis. I'll change that by leading the process to develop a new treaty to replace the Kyoto Protocol, which is set to expire in 2012.

One of the worst messages the President sent was when he took office and rejected completely Kyoto. He could have said we don't like Kyoto but we're immediately starting a new process. But that didn't happen.

Well, come January 2009, I'm sending a different message. I want to act quickly to help develop a new treaty. I will engage in high level meetings with leaders around the world every three months, if that's what it takes to hammer out a new agreement. My goal will be to secure a deal by 2010. We can't wait for two more years.

I will establish an E8 that's modeled on the G8 which is where the big industrial economies come together. We need the world's major carbon-emitting nations to come together to tackle these challenges.

I want to focus on international attention to solve the problem of global deforestation. We're losing our forests dramatically. They play such an important role in removing carbon dioxide from the atmosphere and we need to figure out how to have a win-win strategy for that.

We've seen how good leadership can make a difference in solving global climate and environmental problems. Former Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher understood the urgency of ozone depletion, called a meeting in London and was a driving force in banning ozone-depleting chemicals worldwide.

Seventh, every single American will have a role to play. Everywhere I go, I meet people, and particularly young people and children, who ask me what they can do to fight global warming. What they can do to be more energy independent. Now, I always tell them about my late father who turned off every light before he left any room and he used to turn off the thermostat when we went to bed at night. As he used to say, 'I'm not paying to heat the house, so get more covers.' That sounds kind of funny, but that's what our parents and our grandparents used to do. We've got to be more conscious of how we live today.

On Wednesday, I will outline in greater detail the ways individuals, communities, colleges, schools, all of us can play our role. It starts by asking every American who wishes to sign a pledge to do so to reduce your personal contribution to global warming -- encourage your neighbors to do the same. If every home replaced - this is astonishing and I kept saying are you sure this is true, listen to this - if every single one of our homes replaced just one 60-watt incandescent light bulb with one compact fluorescent, it would save enough energy to light more than 3 million homes and prevent the greenhouse gas emissions equal to the amount produced by 800,000 cars in a year. So when people say well we've got to wait for the government, we got to wait for great companies like Clipper, that's not true. There's something every one of us can do.

I'm going to challenge individuals and businesses to set their own energy saving goals. I'm going to challenge schools, colleges, and universities and students to do the same. And give awards so we can really hold up the best leaders. I'm going to challenge communities to do the same as well. We're going to invest in new management tools so that cities and communities can keep track of what they emit

And when I'm President, the United States Treasury will issue "Energy Independence Bonds" dedicated to the Strategic Energy Fund. During World War II, Americans purchased more than $33 billion worth of war bonds. More than 6 million Americans volunteered to participate in bond drives. I have no doubt that we can appeal to that same sense of duty and patriotism today. As Vice President Gore says, political will is a renewable resource.

Eighth and lastly, I am outlining more than a plan. I have a strategy to make this real. I have tried throughout this campaign not to just to make speeches about what I want to do, but to tell you how I will pay for it and how I will do it.

One of the biggest problems facing those countries that did sign the Kyoto Protocol was turning good intentions into actual, economically beneficial results. As President, I will create a National Energy Council, modeled on the National Economic Council and the National Security Council, to bring together all the relevant players in the federal government to ensure that we all have the same priorities and we follow a rigorous implementation plan. For example, the Energy Department will work more closely with the Education Department on good models for school construction. The Transportation Department will work more closely with the EPA on highway congestion.

The Council will be led by a National Energy Adviser with a direct line to the President to coordinate our government-wide efforts and maintain accountability.

I will also reform the Department of Energy. This energy today is focused primarily on carbon-based fuels and nuclear power, with much less attention to renewables like wind. I will focus the mission of the Department of Energy on moving us toward energy independence, with a new approach to solar and wind and biofuels and hydropower and geothermal and other renewables. This is a transformational challenge for our nation and our government. I will start meeting it on day one.

In one of America's darkest hours - soon after the attack on Pearl Harbor, long before victory was assured - President Roosevelt addressed the nation in one of his Fireside Chats. The President did not mince words. He spoke honestly and in great detail about the scale and scope of the threats we faced. He even asked Americans to take out a map of the world so they could follow along what he was talking about.

The President said, 'the task that we Americans now face will test us to the uttermost. Never before have we been called upon for such a prodigious effort. Never before have we had so little time in which to do so much.' Americans were up to that task. While young brave troops served, and bled and died overseas, here at home Americans did their part. Men and women went to work in factories to build ships and planes. Americans grew victory gardens, purchased war bonds and conserved fuel and electricity. The task before us commands the same urgency and demands the same resolve. Tackling the energy crisis is the calling of our time. And when I am President, it will be the calling of our nation.

And it will involve all of us. And just as the Greatest Generation rose to the occasion, I believe the Greenest Generation will do the same.



In my campaign, I have defined the four big goals for our country: restore our leadership in the world, rebuild a strong and prosperous middle class, reform our government and reclaim the future for our children. Meeting the energy and climate change challenge is essential to reaching every one of those. I do not want to be part of the first generation to leave America and the world in worse shape than when we found them. It will not happen on my watch.



If you want America to be in the solutions business again, if you want to end the destructive partisanship, if you want to bring people together -- join with me in embracing one of the greatest challenges we've ever faced.

It will be an exciting, noble, and rewarding adventure, taking us to places we can't even imagine today. Just like those Clipper ships opened up the world to America, we're going open up the future to our children and grandchildren. And if we do it right they will look back with pride on this moment when Americans came together to turn a threat to our future into the triumph of this new century.



Thank you and God bless you.

I want to introduce one other person. I don't know quite where she is right now but Mary Jo Auliff, where is Mary Jo? Is Mary Jo here? Well Mary Jo Auliff I know was going to try to be here this morning and she is someone whom I met in Iowa City this past weekend. It turns out that Mary Jo and I went to the same high school, Maine East. Just a couple of hours from here in Park Ridge, Illinois. She now lives in LeClair with her husband Russell. They have six sons, two of whom have served in Iraq. And they both work, they work hard.
Russell is a fourth generation Iowa farmer and Mary Jo runs her own small business, but because both Mary Jo and Russell have pre-existing health conditions, they cannot afford insurance so they pay for their healthcare out of pocket, $1000 a month for prescription drugs alone. When Russell got sick, and the medical bills started piling up, they had to sell off half of their farm to pay their medical bills. It was their only option.

Mary Jo, Russell and their family are doing everything right. They're working hard, they're serving our country, they're taking responsibility for themselves and taking care of each other. There are millions of families like them struggling and coming up short in an economy that just doesn't work for middle class Americans any longer.

Today I would like to outline several of the challenges that this economy and our people face: globalization, rising income inequality, the growing housing crisis, all at a time of unprecedented fiscal irresponsibility in Washington.

This administration has failed to respond to these challenges and in fact, many of their policies have made things worse. I will chart a new course as President.

We have to change our economic course just as we have to change course in Iraq, and change course when it comes to health care. When it comes to the economy, I believe I have the strength and experience to make that change -- and to make our economy work again for middle class Americans, and for all Americans.

Because in this new global economy, what have we seen? We've seen some jobs shipped overseas, and others replaced with machines. In this decade the jobs that had been created pay 21% less than the jobs we've lost. It's an economy that doesn't even create many new jobs.

Job growth, since 2001, under President Bush, has been the weakest of any economic recovery since the great depression. It's an economy that demands more from our workers and gives less in return. Over the past six years, worker productivity - that means how hard you're working, how much you put out per hour of your work. Productivity has risen 18%, American workers are the hardest working people in the world. And yet just look around, wages have stayed flat. Corporate profits are at a forty year high but the average family's income in America has fallen by nearly $1,000. Income that is sorely missed as college costs have risen 40%, health care premiums have doubled, and gas prices have more than doubled.

According to a recent report, over the 12-month period that ended in July of last year, the slow growth in wages for labor accounted for 64% of the increase in corporate profits. So in other words, companies are actually profiting off of their worker's stagnant wages.

That is not the way it used to be. It used to be that when corporate profits went up, workers wages went up. But the current group of corporate leadership is not sharing the benefits of that increasing profitability with the workers who make the profits possible.

It's an economy where the gap between the few at the top and everybody else just keeps getting wider. In 2005, all income gains went to the top 10% of households. While, the bottom 90% saw their incomes decline. And the wealthiest 1% held 22% of America's income. Now it used to be less than 10% thirty years ago. This is the highest level of income inequality since 1929. Hardly a red letter year for America.

And six and a half years of fiscal irresponsibility hasn't helped matters. Between the President's reckless tax breaks to those at the top and a war that is costing $300,000,000 a day, we have run up record debts and we are now at $9 trillion and counting.

Now up until recently, at least housing prices were rising, 86% between 1998 and 2006. So while hard working families were getting squeezed from every direction, and their credit cards were often maxed out, they'd use their homes as a safety net. When the bills got too high, they could dip in to their home equity to pay them. Then housing prices started to fall, and suddenly the safety net shrunk.

At the same time, families who financed their homes with non-traditional high risk loans saw their mortgage rates jump. Now many families finally stuck with mortgages they can't pay and expenses they can't afford. The result is 1.3 million foreclosures so far this year. Filings in August alone were up 261% in Iowa, and home prices are expected to decline this year, the first annual nation-wide drop since housing agencies began keeping records in 1950.

Alex Pollick, the former CEO of the Federal Home Loan Bank of Chicago, recently testified before Congress and said that the problems in the housing market could cost America $3 trillion in household wealth. And while we all hope that the housing markets woes remain contained, experts worry that the prices in the housing market could spread throughout the economy. We're already seeing some early warning signs. Consumer confidence has weakened. The pace of employment growth has slowed even more since the beginning of this year. Automakers are recording that the housing prices is hurting auto sales and big investment banks are writing off billions in investments and starting layoffs tied to the housing industry.

So taken together, the pressures of stagnant wages; rising health, education, and energy costs; increased household debt; and a softening housing market are creating a trap door economy. Too many families are standing on that trap door, just one diagnosis, one pink slip, one missed mortgage payment away from falling through and losing everything they've worked for. They're bearing all of the risks of the global economy but reaping few of the rewards.

So I hear all over as I travel throughout Iowa and America, people asking me, people asking themselves, вЂWhat am I going to do?' And I think it's fair to ask our leaders, вЂWhat are you going to do?'

Well for six and a half years we've seen this Administration's answers:

Their answer to jobs being outsourced? Continuing tax incentives to companies that outsource jobs to tax havens.

Their answer to rising inequality? Tax breaks for the wealthy that actually increase inequality.

Their answer to 47 million Americans without health care? Veto health care for five million children from working families.

Their answer to rising insecurity? Shift even more risk onto the individual by trying to privatize Social Security.

Their answer to stagnant wages and anemic job growth? A war on science that has slowed the critical research we need to create the high-wage jobs of the future.

Their economic philosophy boils down to this: In the new global economy, according to the Republicans, America can't win unless most Americans lose. Think about it. That's basically what they're telling us. You know, just go along with it. Some folks are doing really well, that's what we think it takes to compete and win. And everybody else, we're sorry but we just can't help you.

Now middle class families always end up drawing the short straw. Growth, according to this Republican philosophy, has to be unequal and government can't help. Instead, the Bush Administration gives no-bid contracts to political allies, allows no competition for senior citizens' drug prices under Medicare, and assumes no accountability for outsourcing national security responsibilities to contractors like Blackwater. They won't spend money to help working families get health insurance for their kids, but think nothing of giving health care providers billions more to take Medicare patients off the rolls.

Well, my economic philosophy is exactly the opposite. It's what I learned growing up in a middle class family in the middle of America. My father came back from World War II after having served in the Navy, and he worked hard to build up his small business. He believed you should avoid being in debt at all costs and instilled in me the importance of being responsible with a budget at an early age. It's a value I still hold dear today. But it's that determination that I saw in my own family that I see across this state and across our country, that work ethic that has created the great American middle class.

I believe the middle class is the backbone of our economy, the key to real growth, and the guarantor of the American Dream. And to paraphrase an old saying, as America's middle class goes, so goes America. And so I judge the health of our economy very differently than the way this White House judges it. I ask whether our middle class is expanding and getting ahead. Are we on the road to a stronger, more prosperous middle class or not?

The administration has failed that test. My administration will not. We will get back to making it clear that we will have policies that support the American middle class and that will be our goal.

You know, you can go back in American history and see it works.

Throughout our history, whenever we've made strategic investments in our people and our future, the American economy has created unprecedented prosperity. It has spurred scientists to make new discoveries, entrepreneurs to launch new industries. It's generated countless rags to riches stories and produced more millionaires and billionaires than anywhere else on earth. At the same time, it has sustained the world's largest, strongest middle class and given poor people the chance to work their way into the middle class, and left each generation more prosperous than the one before.

The strength of our economy and the rise of the middle class were products of both a free market and good public policy, including sound economic stewardship by Presidents from both parties.

Think about Teddy Roosevelt busting the trusts and rooting out corruption. Franklin Roosevelt building the infrastructure that drove this century's economy. President Truman ensuring that American GIs had the tools they needed to seize the promise of a great and growing future. President Eisenhower supporting more science and math education. President Kennedy set our sights on the moon and President Johnson worked to end poverty and the insecurity that comes as we grow older.

In the 1990s, my husband continued this tradition, combining fiscal responsibility with smart investments in our people. And we did have pay-as-you-go rules that helped to rein in spending.

And look at the results. More than 22 million new jobs and the longest economic expansion in American history. Balanced budgets and record surpluses. Rising family incomes, record levels of home and business ownership, and one hundred times as many people lifted out of poverty than during the Reagan Administration.

The secret to America's past economic success is clear. Whenever the economy changed, we changed with it and we mastered it. We innovated. We invested. We managed downturns and overcame them. And we generated wealth and we made sure that wealth was widely shared. Well in the 1990s we were on our way to creating good jobs, with shared prosperity and the prospect of being debt free and having the resources to fund the retirement costs of the baby boom generation.

Then we came to George W. Bush. Well, it's a sad story. President Bush, with a Republican Congress that enabled him to fully implement the trickle down economics they've been advocating for a generation, ignored a century's worth of wisdom.

In this decade, no American was too wealthy to be denied big tax cuts. No well-connected company too prosperous to lose its tax subsidies or protection from competition for government money. Meanwhile America's middle class families have been invisible to the President. It's as if he's looked right through them.

As college got more expensive, they cut back on college aid. So if you're a young person who can't afford tuition, you're invisible.

As health care got more expensive, they tried to reduce coverage for children. So if you're one of the 47 million Americans without health insurance, you're invisible as well.

As jobs got scarce and paid less, they tried to weaken unions and stopped enforcing our trade laws. So if you're a worker who can't organize for fair wages and safe working conditions, you're invisible too.

And as gas prices exploded, they allowed us to become more dependent on foreign oil. So if you pay through the roof every time you fill up your tank, you're invisible.

Well you're not invisible to me. And when we take back the White House, you will no longer be invisible to the President of the United States.

Because I do see you and I do hear you. I see families working as hard as they can. I see young people eager for opportunity. I see workers fighting for their basic rights. And I will fight for you every single day of my presidency. Because as President, I want to bring a new beginning to the 21st century and build a new road to middle class prosperity.

That is in my view the job of the next President, to restore broad economic prosperity, fairness, and security. It won't be easy, but I know it can be done.

I saw that for myself in the eight years in the White House as my husband carried out one of the most dramatic economic turnarounds in America's history. And for nearly seven years, as a Senator from New York I have been working to build on that commitment, to support good economic policies, resist bad ones, and help, working with local people, to bring economic opportunity to depressed regions of my state.

Today I propose a new economic blueprint for the twenty-first century economy: A plan to create the new, good jobs essential to broad-based prosperity, to restore fairness to our economy, and to renew that basic bargain that if you work hard you can get ahead and we will put our fiscal house in order.

The first component of my plan is to create millions of new jobs through an all out commitment to a clean, efficient, independent energy future and to end this administration's assault on science so that innovation can once again be the engine of our economic growth.

For six and a half years, this Administration first denied the reality of our dependence on foreign oil and then denied the reality of climate change and refused to make a serious effort to deal with either. It is heartbreaking to know we are more dependent on foreign oil today than we were before 9/11. You know, but this on the part of the President was just a small piece of a larger war on science and innovation, from muzzling and overruling scientists, to suppressing and manipulating scientific evidence, to denying funding for stem cell research.

To paraphrase Stephen Colbert, this administration doesn't make decisions based on facts. It makes facts based on decisions. And as a result, our competitors around the world are getting an edge on us in the global economy.

I want to restore America to its rightful place as the innovation nation. New discoveries, new inventions are key to new jobs and prosperity. I'll start by issuing an Executive Order to end the war on science and restore a climate of scientific integrity and independence. This order will rescind President Bush's ban on stem cell research and ensure that government scientists...

I will also dramatically increase investments in basic and applied research at the National Science Foundation, the National Institutes of Health, our universities, and so many other entities that will take advantage of the tax credit for research and experimentation. And I want to invest in the idea-leaders of tomorrow by improving math and science education, expanding fellowships for graduate study, and encouraging more women and minorities to choose careers in science and engineering.

To jumpstart our investment in alternative energy, I will establish a $50 billion Strategic Energy Fund to develop clean energy technologies like biomass and bio-fuels grown right here in Iowa to combat global warming and end our dependence on foreign oil.

We'll pay for the Strategic Energy Fund by eliminating the tax subsidies for the big oil companies and requiring them to pay into the fund.

I would give them an option, if they are willing to invest in alternative, clean, green technologies themselves then they won't have to pay into the fund, they won't get the tax subsidies because there is no reason for us to be subsidizing them. Our oil companies have made record profits on the energy system that has reduced our incomes, accelerated climate change, and undermined our national security. It's time from them finally to do their part to build a new energy economy that benefits all Americans and secures our children's future.

We are seeing what the future could be right here in Iowa. You're leading the way on harnessing the power of alternative energy to create good new jobs. A few months back I visited with some young men in Crawfordsville. They had grown up on farms and they left home to go to school and they were working elsewhere around the country. They started talking about maybe they could actually go home, use what they learned growing up on a farm and make biodiesel fuel and that's what they did. They started a small business and now they have 14 employees and a 10 million gallon capacity.

Countries around the world are moving much faster than we are. Employment for example in Germany in the renewables sector has risen by 50 percent in the past two years to 235,000 new jobs. They expect to create more than 400,000 jobs. There's no reason we can't do the same here in America.

I will also harness the power of innovation to rebuild our crumbling infrastructure. This is a problem that if we don't deal with it we're going to be slowing our economic growth. Economists estimate that every $1 billion spent on fixing crumbling infrastructure creates nearly 48,000 new jobs. My Rebuild America Plan invests $10 billion over ten years in an "Emergency Repair Fund" to begin addressing the extensive backlog of emergency repairs needed in our country.

We need to modernize our roads, our rail systems, our seaports, our public transit systems, and to expand broadband access across America. I've also proposed a $1 billion per year "Green Building Fund" to build and renovate public buildings and make them green and energy efficient and the Mayor is applauding and I know he understands it.

I believe we can innovate our way to 21st century manufacturing. Now I know there are people in America who say we can't be a manufacturing economy any longer and I don't believe that. First of all, I don't want to believe it because I think that a country that doesn't make things is a country that is on a slow slide to income inequality and a rogue economy. But I also believe we have opportunities here that we need to take advantage of. I'm proud to be the co-chair of the Senate Manufacturing Caucus. It's bipartisan, we've worked to come up with ideas that the Bush Administration wouldn't implement but I would as President because I want to incentivize manufacturing in America.

And this is just the beginning. Later this week, I'll be outlining an additional set of innovation initiatives, building on proposals that I've been making through this campaign as well as some new ones.

But in addition to creating new jobs with rising incomes to be globally competitive, we've got to do more to restore fairness to our economy, to empower our workers and ensure that all Americans get their fair share.

That starts with standing up for our unions so that they can stand up for our workers.

Unionized workers make 30% more money than workers who aren't in unions. I want to put that up in a great big billboard because a lot of people don't know that the difference is that dramatic. But today just 7% of our private sector workplace is unionized. Millions of other people whose jobs are not covered are much more vulnerable to unsafe working conditions, being deprived of benefits, not getting their fair share when it comes to the income they receive for the jobs they do.

If more people in America earned higher incomes with better benefits, their consumer spending would increase and that would benefit the entire economy. This should not be a zero sum game where we have winners at the top and losers down the income scale. We need to get back to a win win strategy where we try to empower Americans not only to have a better life for themselves and their families but to be greater contributors to our overall prosperity.

As President, I will fight to pass the Employee Free Choice Act so unions can organize for fair wages and safe working conditions.

You know it used to be in America when the middle class was stronger it was a lot easier to sign up to join a union. And the reason this is such an important issue, even if you're not in a union, maybe you don't understand why this is such a big deal, why people stood up and applauded, is that back when we had a strong middle class that was really growing and people were getting a standard of living that their parents and grandparents would not have dreamed of, it was a lot easier. Now, with Republican Presidents and Republican Congresses, it's become so hard and there is harassment and there is intimidation and the employers really just push people so that they don't feel that a union is in their interest. I want people to make up their own minds. You know, it's a free country. If you can decide to join a civic organization you should be able to decide to join a union without fear of coercion and if you don't want to decide to join one, well that's your choice as well.

Unlike the current President, I will actually appoint people to the Department of Labor and the National Labor Relations Board who are pro-labor and care about working people...

And I will work from day one to ensure that our trade policies actually work for American workers. That they include strong enforceable protections for labor and environmental standards, and that they deliver benefits not just for trading partners, not just for the people at the top of the income scale in America, but for all Americans.

Because look at what has happened in the past six years. Our trade deficit has doubled in just six years to $760 billion a year. The Economic Policy Institute estimates that we've lost 1.8 million jobs to China, we're paying higher prices for low cost consumer goods some of which have serious safety problems. Now the last 6 years may have been great for China, but is it the best course for America going forward? I don't think so.

It's time for a new approach, one that doesn't lead to a race to the bottom, but instead ensures that ordinary citizens not CEO's but people who do the work in America and in other nations come out ahead again.

I will start by appointing a Trade Enforcement Officer within the United States Trade Representative's Office who will be responsible for vigorously enforcing trade agreements. And I will double the size of the enforcement unit. The Bush Administration has filed roughly the same number of enforcement actions under our trade agreements that were filed during one year of the Clinton Administration. That is unacceptable. They're abdicating their responsibility, no one should get away with violating trade agreements, and when I'm President, we're going to start enforcing them again and we're not going to enter into them unless we think they're going to be good for American workers.

Next I will work to address specific problems with NAFTA. As I've said before, this agreement has some serious shortcomings. For example, I did a study last year in New York looking at the impact of NAFTA on our business people, our workers and our farmers because we share a long boarder with Canada. But what people were telling me whom I represent is they could not get their products into Canada despite NAFTA's promise of equal access. And I did a study and I sent it to the Bush Administration and I said I want answers as to why this is not working. You know I have apple farmers up along the boarder, they couldn't get their apples in but apples were coming out of Canada. I had business people who couldn't figure out how to get through all of the red tape to get their products in, but products were coming out of Canada. Now we have a great relationship with Canada. But I think it is time that we assess trade agreements every five years to make sure they're meeting their goals or make adjustments if they are not and we should start with doing that with NAFTA.

And finally, I will overhaul our Trade Adjustment Assistance Program to ensure that workers who've lost their jobs because of global competition get the income support, the health care, the job training and the job placement assistance they need to get back on their feet.

You know the Trade Adjustment Assistance Program is a lifeline for workers across America who can use it. Unfortunately too few people can use it. First, service workers whose jobs are lost to outsourcing should be able to be eligible to receive TAA benefits. It makes no sense to keep excluding service workers because we know we're losing a lot of service jobs overseas. Second, TAA should cover all workers whose plants have moved abroad whether or not the plant moved to a country with which we have a free trade agreement. Believe it or not, Trade Adjustment Assistance currently does not cover workers whose jobs are outsourced to China and India because we don't have free trade agreements with them.

I want to double the funding for the job training program under TAA to $440 million a year and increase TAA tax credits to help displaced workers pay for health insurance. Now ultimately under my American Health Choices Plan, workers will be able to buy into the Federal Employees Health Benefits Plan, the same program that insures members of Congress.

I will also work to restore fairness to our tax system. First I will return to the income tax rates for upper-income Americans that we had in the 1990s.

Those rates were consistent with a balanced budget and economic growth. And I will level the playing field when it comes to taxes on income. Right now, Wall Street investment managers making $50 million a year pay just 15% on their earnings because they classify what they do as ordinary income. As not ordinary income, but as capital gains. When they go to work everyday, they manage all this money, but they say what they're doing is an investment, not management. Well a teacher making $50, 000 a year pays 25%.

Those who have been most richly rewarded by the modern economy should not pay lower tax rates on their incomes than nurses or home health care workers or bus drivers or machinists or anybody else and we are going to make sure that they no longer do.

For middle class Americans, I will extend the tax cuts including the child tax credit, the marriage penalty relief, and lower income tax rates that they currently pay. And I will reform something called the Alternative Minimum Tax, the AMT, to make sure it doesn't hit middle class families with higher tax rates. It was never intended to do that. I will also expand the Earned Income Tax Credit to help families that are struggling to join the middle class. And I will be providing tax credits to help small businesses pay for health care.

I want to take a hard look at corporate tax reform as well. It is simply not right that as corporate profits have skyrocketed, the percentage of taxes paid by corporations has fallen. We can fix that if we close the loopholes, end the unjustifiable tax breaks, and stop subsidizing the movement of jobs to foreign tax havens. We're going to get that done...

The third component of my plan is to restore America's basic bargain, if you work hard you can get ahead because you'll have the tools and support you need to succeed in the global economy.

That starts with recommitting ourselves to making college affordable for young people. You know I was in New Hampshire yesterday morning and a young man stood up and asked a question, he said he was a high school senior. He wanted to go to college, he hoped eventually he could even go to law school. He said where am I going to get the financial help to do that? He said I'm one of the top students in my class and I'm afraid I won't be able to afford to do what I want to do to pursue my dreams. Well on Thursday I will outline my plan for making college affordable, including modernizing the HOPE Scholarship Program that provides tax credits to help young people attend college.

We know that we've got to improve the skills and education of our workforce. But today, and I have to confess I was surprised, I asked to find out the statistic but even I was surprised. 75% of students at America's best public and private universities and colleges come from the top 25% of income in America. Think about that. So that leaves 25% for everybody else. Just 3% of the students come from the bottom 25% of income. It didn't used to be like this. We used to believe that if you worked hard and you were college material, you would go to college. We clearly need to make college accessible so that students from all different backgrounds have the chance to fulfill their God-given potential.

And for those who don't attend four-year colleges, and who need skills and training, let's provide more support for community colleges and institutions that help prepare them for good, high-paying jobs.

About a year and a half ago I had two meetings within the space of one week. I had a meeting with the auto dealers from New York who came to see me and they said, you know, Senator, we have 600 good jobs for auto mechanics right now that we can't get filled because nobody's training auto mechanics any longer. And the job is more complicated because we all have these computers in our cars, you know, they talk to us and tell us which way to turn and all that. And the auto dealers say we don't know what to do so we're going to start our own school because we don't know where we're going get people to do this important job. Shortly after that I had a visit from some of the members of the machinist union that I work with in New York. They told me they were worried about the aging of the machinists on airplanes, the workforce is getting older, what were we going to do to have a pipeline with more young people?

So, this is a problem that we should begin to handle now. We have a lot of decent hardworking young and not so young people who deserve to have a good job. And I believe skilled workers will be in a shortage in the future. So let's start giving them the tools they need to be competitive right now.

And of course I outlined my health care plan to ensure that every American has quality, affordable health care. You know, the American Health Choices Plan is really simple. If you have insurance you like, you keep it. If you don't have insurance or don't like the insurance you have, you can choose from the same menu of private plans available to members of Congress or you can opt into a new public plan that will be like Medicare. We'll provide those tax credits to make it affordable and your coverage will be guaranteed even if you lose your job, even if it is outsourced. And if you decide to start your own business or stay home with your children for a few years, you will never be denied coverage because of pre-existing conditions or risk factors.

I believe we can save $120 billion a year in our health care system. If we emphasize prevention, which we don't do now; if we emphasize chronic care management, which we don't do very well now; if we move toward electronic medical records so we don't keep losing medical records and people are told they have to take the same test twice, three times over and when you travel from Iowa to see your family in Illinois or Florida you can have that record at your fingertips. So, there's a lot we can do. And that will also create new jobs.

And finally another component of the basic bargain is homeownership. Years of progress on this front are threatened by the growing problems in the housing market and I think we have to address this crisis immediately. If home prices keep falling, many families will soon find themselves with mortgages larger than the value of their homes. At that point, they won't be able to refinance. So we don't have any time to waste.

I've already announced a four-part plan to address mortgage industry abuses. Crack down on unscrupulous brokers, curb unfair lending practices, support state and community initiatives that help families avoid foreclosure, and increase the supply of affordable housing in America again.

Today I'm announcing three new proposals.

The first is what I'm calling the Save Our Homes Program to rescue families trapped in unworkable mortgages. $50 billion dollars worth of adjustable rate mortgages are resetting in October and approximately $30 billion will reset every month thereafter for the next year. That means hundreds of thousands of Americans will see their mortgage rates jump and too many will go into default. The Save Our Homes Program will enable these two federally chartered entities, Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, as well as state housing finance agencies, to replace these unworkable mortgages with stable, fixed-rate loans that families can afford.

My second proposal is the Realizing the Dream Program to make more mortgage credit available to responsible homebuyers now. Right now because of market conditions, many banks are reluctant to write mortgages even for responsible, credit-worthy buyers. They're especially reluctant to write mortgages larger than those that Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac can buy from them. So my plan would temporarily increase the size of the mortgages that Fannie and Freddie, as we call them in Washington, can purchase and that would encourage more banks to continue making loans to more Americans.

My third proposal is a Foreclosure Rescue Fraud Act to crack down on the unscrupulous consultants. I already said let's crack down on the unscrupulous brokers. Now we've got a whole new field of unscrupulous consultants that are knocking on the doors of people who are at risk of losing their homes. They're claiming to be able to help homeowners avoid foreclosure. They're taking hefty fees and they're disappearing. No actual assistance - spread the word. Anybody you know, don't listen to anybody who calls you on the phone or knocks on your door and tells you they've got a great way of saving your home. If it's too good to be true, it probably isn't true.

So what I want to do is to create a federal statute imposing criminal penalties on these fraudulent consultants and allow victims to collect damages so that they don't get even more victimized.

As you know in America, homeownership isn't just the key to financial security, it's about laying down roots in your community and building the life you want for you and your family. And I will make sure that the dream of homeownership is not lost.

And I will also protect retirement security. We're going to stand up for Social Security and Medicare. I'll be outlining in more detail my plan to help Americans save, invest, and build wealth for retirement tomorrow because we know we've got to tackle that as well. And I don't think we can do all of this unless we return America to fiscal responsibility. And what we've seen from this President is increased spending at more than double the rate of the previous administration. Anybody who tells you that the Republicans are the party of fiscal responsibility, just roll your eyes because the facts could not be more different. How has President Bush paid for these tax cuts to multi-millionaires, oil companies, and other interest groups? How has he paid for the War in Iraq and the no-bid contracts and the tax cuts that seem to have no end in sight?

I'll tell you how he's done it. He's run record deficits and he's borrowed money from foreign countries like China. When he took office we had those budget surpluses and we were on track to be debt free in a few years. Now with a national debt of $9 trillion, up nearly 60% since President Bush took office, he's left our children and our grandchildren to pay the bill. Did you know that every baby born in America today starts life with $30,000 of national debt on his or her tiny shoulders? That is the largest birth tax in history. And trillions of it is owed to countries like China, and Japan, and Korea, and Middle East producers of oil, we even owe money to Mexico. Put simply, we are borrowing money from abroad to give tax cuts to President Bush's friends and special interests.

So when people ask me, why is it so hard to get tough on China and other trading partners, I tell them because they've been turned into our bankers. We owe them. How can we truly enforce trade laws against a country like China whose manipulated currency puts us at unfair disadvantage, but our economic stability depends on them continuing to provide massive loans to us every single month?

I want America back in control of our fiscal destiny. It may take a few years but we have to move back toward a balanced budget and a surplus. We have to find a way both to increase long-term investment and to stop borrowing money from other countries for current consumption, whether it's for our soldiers in the field or for tax cuts for millionaires. We have to develop a set of budget rules similar to those we had in the 90s that required us to fund new expenditures with new revenues or cut spending.

I think it's going to be a challenge to do this but I believe this is the change that America wants. If we do it right, we will spark broadly shared prosperity even greater than the growth we enjoyed in the 90s. I look at the world we're in now and yes I see a lot of threats, a lot of challenges, but I see tremendous opportunities.

Seventy-one years ago this month during a campaign stop in Kansas City, Missouri, President Franklin Roosevelt said: "To a greater degree than any other peoples, we have sought to give each rising generation a little better chance in life than the one that preceded it." He spoke also of our "faith in the future -- a faith under which America has only begun to march."

Well, it's time for America to march again, toward rebuilding our middle class and restoring our faith in the future our children and grandchildren deserve. It's a forward march I want to lead and I hope you will give me the honor to do that.

Thank you all very much.

Thank you. It's a great personal honor for me to be here with extraordinary leaders of our nation's military forces and to thank them for their long and dedicated service to our country. I am grateful for their confidence in my ability to lead our nation in difficult times.
I want to thank my long time friend General Clark who served with such distinction and success. I want to thank another long time friend Secretary Togo West, who not only served the Army but also served the Veterans Affairs Department and gave great devotion to our men and women in the military and then when they become our veterans. I want to thank Admiral Dave Stone, General John Watkins, General Joe Ballard, and I want to thank General Antonio Taguba who showed extraordinary courage in the face of very difficult challenges when he accepted an assignment to lead the investigation into what happened at Abu Ghraib. I also want to thank all the other veterans, former officers, noncommissioned officers who are here with me and I want to also express my appreciation to all who are supporting me in this campaign.

We are here at such an extraordinary moment in American history. The stakes have rarely been higher. I've had numerous historians tell me that America's point in our arch of destiny, today is perhaps most similar to the situation confronting President Truman when he became our president and commander in chief.

Dramatic events during this past week have reminded us how volatile our world has become and how essential it is that we have sound strategy and strong leadership. From Kosovo to Cuba, from Iraq to Pakistan, to our embassy being burned in Belgrade, these are some of the most challenging spots on our global map. The world is being transformed with enormous risks and possibilities that we must meet with confidence, optimism, resolution and success.

The next president will inherit all of these global challenges and more from a president who failed to handle them well. A war in Afghanistan and a war in Iraq. America's reputation at an all-time low. Countries rushing to acquire nuclear weapons. Crushing poverty that stymies economic and political progress in too many regions of the world. Global warming and global health pandemics. Genocide in Darfur. A rise of borderless, stateless criminal cartels. And the continuing real threat of terrorism here at home and abroad.

But while these stark realities carry dangers, they also bring unprecedented opportunities if we act wisely, if we have the right kind of leadership. There isn't any doubt in my mind that we will not only navigate through these uncharted difficult waters but emerge stronger than ever, reasserting both our leadership and our moral authority.

The vision I have for America is one that is rooted in those values. Values that have served us well but have been temporarily sidelined because of this administration's approach to the world.

Over the past seven years, we've seen what happens when the president presents the American people with a series of false choices and then is indifferent about the consequences: force versus diplomacy, unilateralism versus multilateralism, hard power versus soft. We've seen the tragic result of having a president who had neither the experience nor the wisdom to manage our foreign policy and safeguard our national security. We can't let that happen again. America has already taken that chance— one time too many.

The symbol of our presidency – the American Eagle – holds arrows in one talon and an olive branch in the other. Both are symbolic tools of what we need to keep our democracy strong and our nation safe— tools that a President must know how to use in the daily course of events, but also when that 3 a.m. phone call comes to the White House because an unforeseen crisis has erupted without warning. In that split second the president has to respond and make a decision that could affect the safety and lives of millions of people here in our country and around the world. Whoever sits at that desk in the Oval Office on January 20th, 2009 needs all the tools available, all the resources at our disposal, and the wisdom to know how to use them.

I propose a new American strategy to restore our moral authority, end the war in Iraq, and defend and protect our nation.

We need a president who understands there is a time for force, a time for diplomacy, and a time for both, who understands that we enhance our international reputation and strengthen our security if the world sees the human face of American democracy in the good works, the good deeds we do for people seeking freedom from poverty, hunger, disease, illiteracy, and oppression.

With me, this is not theoretical. This is very much who I am, what I have done, and what I will do. The American people don't have to guess whether I understand the issues or whether I would need a foreign policy instruction manual to guide me through a crisis or whether I'd have to rely on advisers to introduce me to global affairs.

I'm lucky to have had a pretty good inside view, over eight years in the White House and now over seven years in the Senate, of what the president goes through day in and day out dealing with all of these challenges. Obviously the work that I have done on human rights, democracy, international development gives me a deep appreciation of the importance of winning the hearts and minds of those in societies whether or not they are for us today. I believe that we can seed democracy and create new strong alliances overseas.

And I also know from my years serving on the Senate Armed Services Committee that our military power is absolutely essential but it cannot be viewed as the solution to every international problem. Yes, we must use force when necessary but as a last resort, not a first resort. As one piece of a comprehensive strategy to defend our nation and promote our values.

I've been honored to travel to more than 80 countries representing the United States. In sessions with foreign leaders, with influential citizens from the world of business, academia, human rights and so much else. I have traveled to Iraq and Afghanistan three times. And I've seen and have said repeatedly that we must revise our strategy in Afghanistan. When I first went to Afghanistan in 2003 I was met by a soldier who said "welcome to the forgotten front lines in the war against terrorism." I regret to say that those front lines are still largely forgotten.

It will take a new policy toward Pakistan – one that builds on the democratic yearnings expressed by the Pakistani people in elections last week and recognizes that the border areas between Pakistan and Afghanistan are among the most important and dangerous in the world. Ignoring these realities of what is happening on the ground in both Afghanistan and Pakistan has been one of the most dangerous failures of the Bush foreign policy.

I have been to Africa and have seen how disease —HIV, AIDS, Tuberculosis, Malaria — undermine progress across an entire continent. I pushed our government to start battling the global AIDS epidemic because this affects our security too. I'm very hopeful that we will make progress in Africa dealing with the multiplicity of challenges that the continent faces. It was my great honor to go to Africa in the mid 1990s as a precursor to my husband's trip and I applaud President Bush and Mrs. Bush for going back. We need a consistent coherent strategy in dealing with Africa and that is something that I will promote.

I'm also very proud that the United States Joint Forces Command invited me to be the only senator to serve on the Transformation Advisory Group, which studies and proposes ideas to modernize and strengthen our military, to meet new and emerging global threats. That experience reinforced my commitment to looking at every single challenge we face not through a narrow prism but a broad overview because it is all interconnected – what kind of military we need, what tools we provide our men and women who serve us is directly related to what it is we are trying to accomplish and how best to utilize those resources effectively. I know very well that in exercising foreign policy you have to know both how to find common ground and how to stand our ground.

Dealing with the rising power of China provides an example. I went to Beijing in 1995 and spoke out for women's rights and human rights. The Chinese government wasn't happy; they pulled the plug on the broadcast of my speech. But I took that as a compliment. Because it was important for the United States both to be represented and to make absolutely clear that human rights is an integral part of our foreign policy and that women's rights is key to that. What we have learned is that where women are oppressed and denied their basic rights we are more likely to have regimes that are more adversarial to American interests and values.

Today, China is most obviously the world's largest and one of its fastest growing economies. It's become a global superpower that needs to be convinced to play by the rules in the global marketplace. Here again, the Bush administration has failed. One third of our trade deficit is with China and over the course of the last seven years Bush policies have has allowed the Chinese government to become our banker. Today, China's steel comes here and our jobs go there. We play by the rules and they manipulate their currency. We get tainted fish and lead-laced toys and poisoned pet food in return. That will change when I am in the White House because I know we have got to take a consistent approach towards China.

I've co-sponsored legislation to compel the Administration to take aggressive steps to stop China from manipulating its currency, to make our goods look more expensive. I'm the original co-sponsor of the Foreign Debt Ceiling Act which really means that we would require any administration to begin reversing our trade deficit and start breaking our reliance on China for not only what they provide to us in terms of the way they buy our dollars and buy our debt but also to be held to higher standards for what they import into our market.

We have to make sure that American companies have a level playing field when it comes to trade. We're far from reaching that goal. And I think it's imperative that we move because what is happening is that our standard of living in America is deteriorating. That has direct and serious implications for our capacity to operate effectively on behalf of our strategic interests in the world. It's very difficult to persuade the American people that we must continue to lead, that yes, there will be occasions when we have to sacrifice in furtherance of our values and interests if the standard of living, the family income here at home is deteriorating. So this is something that has to be seen as a whole. Our fiscal irresponsibility over the last seven years has undermined our ability to be the leader we need to be in the world. You cannot talk about our military and our other objectives strategically and have mired ourselves in debt and dependent upon foreign countries to keep us afloat.

That also goes hand in hand with our continuing refusal to have an energy policy that is in line with our strategic objectives. So when we talk about foreign policy, we have to talk about fiscal policy, energy policy and so much else besides just the narrow view that has been primarily driven by the Bush Administration over the last seven years. So, in order to address these new challenges we do have to set a new tone both here at home and around the world. That requires that we start with the most basic of duties. A commander in chief must protect and defend our nation.

On my first day in office, I will announce, as I have repeatedly in this campaign, that the era of cowboy diplomacy is over. That includes the doctrine of pre-emptive war. I have been against that for many years. I believe it led us into a blind alley and I don't think I need to remind the retired flag officers here today how difficult the choices made by the president have been for American military. We need a new national military strategy that employs military power wisely instead of squandering it.

That requires us to begin to bring out troops home from Iraq within 60 days of the new president taking office. I believe we can redeploy one to two brigades a month but I also believe it will be dangerous. There's been a lot of talk about withdrawal and redeployment and I think it needs to be put into an appropriate context. Withdrawing troops is not easy. One does not wake up in the morning and say let's bring them home. It requires planning that looks at every possible contingency. That's why last spring I began pushing the Bush administration to tell us what planning had gone on, whether they were ready to bring our young men and women home. They didn't want to talk to us about it, as is their usual response. We finally were able to secure a briefing which although classified, I can tell you was cursory. It did not inspire confidence in our readiness to do this important task of withdrawing our troops and equipment. I think it is also important that we look at what else needs to happen simultaneously. We have 100,000 or so American civilians in Iraq. They work at the embassy and other government agencies, for businesses and charities. We need a plan for them as well. And we also have Iraqis who sided with us. One of the young officers who spoke in the pre-program is someone I have known a long time, Someone I've known quite a long time. Marine Captain Iscol who began talking to me about the need to take care of those who take care of our troops, translators and drivers. When Captain Iscol was leading his men in the battle that retook Fallujah, he has said, as I've heard other young marine officers who were part of that battle tell me, they would not have survived had it not been for their translators. Honor is important. It's important to our country. We are an honorable nation therefore we must do more to take care of those who sided with, protected and saved the lives of young Americans in Iraq.

If I am entrusted with the presidency, America will have the courage, once again, to meet with our adversaries. But I will not be penciling in the leaders of Iran or North Korea or Venezuela or Cuba on the presidential calendar without preconditions, until we have assessed through lower level diplomacy, the motivations and intentions of these dictators. Raul Castro, for example, has a stark choice. He can continue to stifle human rights and economic freedom in Cuba, or he can chart a new course toward democratic reform. We need to engage with our allies in Latin America and Europe to encourage Cuba on to the right path. But we simply cannot legitimize rogue regimes or weaken American prestige by impulsively agreeing to presidential level talks that have no preconditions. It may sound good but it doesn't meet the real world test of foreign policy. I have traveled to so many countries working on issues involving some of the most intractable challenges we face. And as we see people respond to their own conditions, we have to be ready to act.

The clearest example of that is what just happened in Pakistan. The Pakistani people essentially repudiated the Bush administration's policies and created a new dynamic that could lead to greater freedoms and democracy or to a greater crisis with implications for the war in Afghanistan.

One thing the American people can be sure of, I will not broadcast threats of unilateral military action against a country like Pakistan just to demonstrate that I am tough enough for the job. We have to change our tone and change our course.

So let's begin by reviving old fashioned diplomacy. One of my criticisms of the Bush administration is that they have such a narrow circle of people advising the President. Apparently there is only one diplomat the President will send anywhere and that is Secretary Rice. So if Secretary Rice can't get to the Middle East or get to Pakistan or get to Africa or get anywhere, you don't get the feeling that the President is engaged. I think that is a terrible failure.

The president needs to have a broad circle of advisers calling upon distinguished Americans both in and out of government to serve as presidential envoys, something that I urged when I came back from Pakistan and Afghanistan last January. I urged the White House to send a high-level presidential envoy. I said there is a lot of misunderstanding between President Musharraf and President Karzai and it is going to cause us problems. That was not accepted by the White House and instead, full support continued for President Musharraf as he moved further and further away from democracy, as his strategy for battling Al Qaeda, the Taliban and other extremists proved time and time again to be inadequate.

We have a new opportunity now. We need to be supporting those in Pakistan from the middle class, from the professions who are our natural allies in order to give American approval to the changes that have taken place in the elections. The more we have people invested in their own futures, the more likely they are to work with us to protect our future. That is what I will attempt to do. It is also important that we revive our commitment at a very public level to human rights and individual freedom.

Let's close Guantanamo. Let's make it clear that we will never sanction torture and we will stand for the rule of law. Let's build a real coalition of allies to defeat terrorists in Afghanistan and other countries that provide a safe haven for al Qaeda. Let's make it clear that any terrorists who attack the United States, who have safe haven in any country, are putting that country at risk. That is one way for us to demonstrate that we will not be the aggressor, we will not engage in pre-emptive attacks, but we will defend our nation.

We need, also, to begin to be serious about Darfur. Everyday we fail to act, the betrayal of fundamental values. The peace keeping force has not been deployed for reasons many of you know— objections by members of the security counsel among others. The United States has to be pushing much more aggressively to get that done.

We also do need to lead the world toward a sound energy policy that treats global warming as the crisis it is and not science fiction. I have said that I would meet with the countries that are the biggest emitters of greenhouse gas emissions until we hammered out an agreement, hopefully within a year that would China and India who have to be part of the solution.

We also need to be moving quickly toward a coming to terms with our oil companies and our oil producing country allies. We need to demonstrate our commitment to home-grown energy. We can't do that, I know, until the two oil men leave the White House but as soon as they do, we have to be ready aggressively. We will lead the world in combating AIDS. I was proud to sign a pledge to invest $50 billion by 2013 to combat AIDS across the globe.

We will lead the world in standing up for women's rights and I know that this is an issue that goes to the heart of who we are as a nation. Because when women continue to comprise the majority of the world's unhealthy, unfed and unschooled, the global community cannot prosper or make progress. When women continue to be raped as a tactic of war, trafficked by criminal cartels, and subjected to violence both in and out of their homes, that compromises the dignity and humanity of the entire human family.

We will also lead in providing opportunity to the world's children. When 100 million children in the developing world don't attend school and 150 million more drop out before finishing the first grade – that is a recipe for poverty, instability and extremism. That's why I have introduced the bipartisan Education for All Act; $10 billion over five years for the goal of basic education for every boy and every girl around the world.

Now, that is the beginning of the security agenda that I would begin implementing within the first 100 days. We all know that we have a lot of work to do to repair the damage that we will inherit. In this campaign people are offered clear choices. Senator McCain is a friend of mine. He is to be commended for his courageous service to our nation during the Vietnam War. But in terms of foreign and security policy, in the calamitous wake of President Bush, Senator McCain can't seem to budge from Bush approach that insists on using military force when diplomacy is needed. He has said he wants to keep our troops in Iraq. It would be fine with him for 50 to 100 years. I will start bringing them home within 60 days.

It's also important that we combine all of our tools, economic aid, humanitarian aid, focusing on issues like disease, children's schooling and women's place, something that I believe I will be much better able to do.

Senator Obama, meanwhile, represents another choice. He wavers from seeming to believe that mediation and meetings without preconditions can solve the world's most intractable problems. To advocating rash unilateral military action without cooperation from our allies in the most sensitive region of the world.

Electing a president should not be an either/or proposition when it comes to national security. We need a president who knows how to deploy both the olive branch and the arrows, who will be ready to act swiftly and decisively in a crisis, who will pursue strategic demands of hard diplomacy to re-establish moral authority and our leadership. In this moment of peril and promise, we need a president who is tested and ready, who can draw on years of real world experience working on many of the issues that we now confront, who knows when to stand ones ground and when to seek common ground, who has the strength and fortitude to meet the challenges head on without fear and without sowing fear.

I believe I am the candidate most ready today to be that kind of president and commander in chief.

I will never let America's good name be disgraced. I will always protect and defend our nation and I will always advance the traditions and values that have made our country, as President Lincoln said, the last best hope on earth. Thank you all very much.

I also want to recognize Lieutenant Governor Anthony Brown, an Iraq War veteran, the lieutenant governor of Maryland. I'm proud to have his support.

Thank you, Indiana. Thank you. Not too long ago, my opponent made a prediction. He said I would probably win Pennsylvania. He would win North Carolina, and Indiana would be the tie-breaker. Well, tonight we've come from behind, we've broken the tie, and thanks to you, it's full speed on to the White House.
This has been an extraordinary experience, traveling across Indiana, having an opportunity to meet so many of you. And for everyone who holds your breath at the gas pump, afraid to see how much it cost today, and for everyone working day and night because you want the world for your kids. For every young person with big dreams who deserves a world of opportunity, and for all those who aren't in the headlines but have always written America's story, tonight is your victory right here.

I want to commend Senator Obama and his supporters on their win in North Carolina. We are, in many ways, on the same journey. It's a journey begun long before we were born. It is a journey by men and women who have been on a mission to perfect our union, who marched and protested, who risked everything they had to build an America that embraces us all. And tonight, once again, I need your help to continue our journey.

This has always been your campaign and this is your victory, because your support has meant the difference between winning and losing. And we can only keep winning if we're able to keep competing against an opponent who does outspend us massively. So I hope you will go to hillaryclinton.com and support our campaign. This is a very touching moment for me. I grew up in the Midwest, born in Chicago, raised in Park Ridge, Illinois. My dad was a World War II vet who started his own small business, and originally from Scranton, PA., that's right.

My mother had a difficult childhood, but worked hard to provide a loving home for us. And she didn't attend college herself, but was determined her children would. And I don't think she ever dreamed she would see a night like this. Their story, like every one of our stories, is the American story. It's a story of men and women who embrace opportunity, never waver in the face of adversity, and never stop believing in the promise of America. And yet today, I have met so many people here in Indiana and across America who feel invisible.

You sure feel invisible when you're paying $60 or $70 to fill up your tank. You feel invisible when the money you took to the grocery store no longer meets your needs for the next week. You feel invisible when your health insurance disappears and college is out of reach. And you can't believe how invisible you feel when your loved one who served our country in war is ill-served back at home.

I know these stories and I see you and I hear you. And I know how hard you're working, working for yourselves and working for your families. And I will never stop fighting for you, so that you can have the future you deserve.

Tonight, Hoosiers have said that you do want a President who stands strong for you, a President who is ready on Day One to take charge as Commander-in-Chief and keep our families safe; a President who knows how to make this economy work for hardworking middle class families. And there are a lot of ideas about how best to do that.

Because we need all of the good common sense that Americans have to offer. I know that we have got an important debate going on right now about how we are going to help families deal with these gas prices. They have gone up so fast, so out of sight in the minds of the people that I talk with and I think it's time that we really had a concerted strategy. You've heard me say this and I'll say it again. I think its time to give Americans a break this summer and to make the oil companies pay the gas tax out of their record profits.

I say it's time to cover every single American with health insurance.

And I say it's time to freeze foreclosures for families most at risk of losing their homes, including our soldiers who are in harm's way and are being foreclosed on here in America.

Fundamentally, I believe that Americans need a champion in their corner, that for too long we've had a president who has stood up and spoke out for the wealthy and the well-connected. But I don't think that's what Americans need or what they're looking for now. And I think standing up for working people is about the American Dream and the Democratic Party. And I think standing up for the middle class is about who we are and who we can be if we stick together.

So it is important that as we go forward in this campaign that we recognize we are all on the same team. We are going to be standing up for you. We're going to be looking for a way to turn this country around and bring it back to what it should stand for and be all about - better futures for you and your children, solving the problems that affect us here in America.

I know that people are watching this race and they're wondering, I win, he wins, I win, he wins. It's so close. And I think that says a lot about how excited and passionate our supporters are and how intent so many Americans are to really taking their country back. But I can assure you, as I have said on many occasions that no matter what happens, I will work for the nominee of the Democratic Party, because we must win in November.

And I know that Senator Obama feels the same way, because we have been on this campaign trail now for a long time. And we know how desperately people want to see a change, and it will not be a change if the Republicans keep the White House. It will be more of the same, something that no one, no matter what political party you may be, can afford. It is time for all of us to recognize what is at stake in this election, not just for Democrats as we decide who will be our nominee, but for all Americans.

The soldiers and the veterans that I meet, they always say to me, promise you'll take care of my buddies. They rarely ask for themselves. And they need a president who will take care of them. And when I talk with the people who come to rallies and events like this, very often it's with a bit of hesitation that they tell me they've lost their job, they've lost their health care; they can't afford to go to college. And it just breaks my heart, because when I think about the America that I grew up in, the future was unlimited, the potential was there for all of us if we were willing to work hard and do our part.

So this journey that we're on together is one that has been a blessing for me, because I know what this country has meant to me and I know what it still means to all of you. It is now our responsibility to ensure that it will always mean the same for our children and our grandchildren.

I will never give up on you and on your families and on your dreams and on your future. And I want to thank the people of Indiana for your hospitality and your vote of confidence and I especially want to thank your wonderful Senator, Evan Bayh. Evan is an outstanding leader for this state and for America. He's been your governor. He's now your senator. He's someone whom I look to for advice and counsel. He's worked tirelessly on this campaign and I'm so grateful to him and his wonderful wife Susan. I also want to thank the people of North Carolina, who were so hospitable and gracious to us.

And I especially want to thank Mike and Mary Easley for their friendship and support. Governor Easley is a visionary leader for North Carolina and we had so much fun campaigning in the Tar Heel state.

And while we are celebrating tonight, I would like to take a moment to express my deepest sympathies to the victims of the devastating cyclone in Burma. Our hearts and prayers go out to the people there and I call upon the Junta that has ruled Burma for so many years to please let the rest of the world in to help. This is a time when everyone should be there to lift up those who are affected by this deadly storm.

And I want to thank all of my friends who have worked so hard. I want to thank my friends in labor. I want to thank my staff, my volunteers and my supporters. And I especially want to thank my family for their incredible love and support. Bill and Chelsea. People ask us all the time, how do you keep going? We love getting out and meeting people. We love having a chance to be with all of you, and didn't Chelsea do a great job? I know a lot of people enjoyed seeing my husband again out on the campaign trail.

So now it is on to West Virginia, Kentucky, Oregon, and the other states where people are eager to have their voices heard. For too long, we've let places like West Virginia and Kentucky slip out of the Democratic column. Well, it's time for that to change and these next primaries are another test. I'm going to work my heart out in West Virginia and Kentucky this month and I intend to win them in November in the general election.

I want the people in these upcoming states to know we are going to work hard to reach out to all of you, because we want you to know that the Democratic Party is your party. And a Democratic President will be good for you. So please, come join us in our campaign. And I am running to be the President of all of America - north, south, east and west, and everywhere in between. That's why it is so important that we count the votes of Florida and Michigan.

It would be a little strange to have a nominee chosen by 48 states. We've got a long road ahead, but we're going to keep fighting on that path for America, because America is worth fighting for. And we believe in America's potential and possibility that has so ignited hope and the dreams of people throughout our country and around the world. People who left everything behind in order to come here and be part of this great experiment in democracy; dissidents and dreamers on every continent who look to us and our ideals for their hope and inspiration. All those around the world who wept for us and prayed for us on September 11th, who laid wreaths and flew flags at half mast and printed that unforgettable headline, "We are all Americans." That is the reach of America's embrace, through time, place and history.

And I know we can once again open our arms to the world. We can once again be the can-do nation; a nation that defies the odds and greets the future with optimism and hope. There isn't anything America can't do once we make up our minds to start acting like Americans again. And that is exactly what we intend to do. Thank you, and God bless you and God bless America.

Well, I'll tell you, I know how we're going to solve the energy crisis.
(LAUGHTER)

We're all going to do it together. This wonderful hall that has meant so much to me over so many years, the site of a lot of great memories for me is a place that I return to with so much love and affection.

And standing up here with my -- looking out at all of you is just an overwhelming experience. I am so grateful to be here.

And I thank Maya (ph) and everyone who is working with her here at Wellesley, the entire Wellesley College students who are putting this team together to support my candidacy and who put this event together today.

I also want to thank the students from all of the colleges and universities. I know we have students from B.U. and Harvard and Yale and Brown and others...

(APPLAUSE)

... who have traveled to be here. And welcome to Wellesley and welcome to this event. It's not exactly a mixer, but I hope you get to meet each other.

(APPLAUSE)

There are a lot of friends in this audience, people whom I have known for a long time, but there are two that I want to recognize, because they've meant so much (inaudible).

That meant two out of four feet had to be on the floor at all times. Try it sometime.

(APPLAUSE)

Now, that is a rule that I and many of my classmates became actually nostalgic for when we had college aged children of our own. But while times have clearly changed, what makes this college special has endured.

The world class faculty and staff who push you and challenge you, those late nights and long lunches where you challenge each other and learn from each other, the camaraderie that develops when smart, ambitious young women come together in a community of learning.

In so many ways, this all women's college prepared me to compete on the all boys' club of presidential politics.

(APPLAUSE)

This was a place where you could try out all different kinds of leadership styles, where you could ask for critique and support from your friends and the faculty with whom you had an ongoing relationship. It was a place that truly did prepare women to make the best choices that we thought were right for our own lives.

I have to tell you, though, when I came to Wellesley, I never in a million years could have imagined I would one day return as a candidate for the presidency of the United States. Back then, I didn't even know for sure I would return for my sophomore year.

(LAUGHTER)

I had grown up in the Midwest, outside of Chicago.

(APPLAUSE)

I had serious doubts about this whole going east for college idea and just one month after I moved into my room in Stone Davis, I felt...

(APPLAUSE)

... I felt like all my worst fears had been confirmed. So many of my classmates had traveled the world. They learned and spoke multiple languages. I was struggling in my classes, in fact, to the point where my French professor said to me, "Mademoiselle, your talents lie elsewhere."

(LAUGHTER)

And I called home. In those days, you called collect. And my parents took the call, which was a good thing, and I said I just didn't think that I could do this. It wasn't for me.

Now, my father said that was just fine. I think he missed me. But my mother, who never got to go to college, would not hear a word of it. She said, "Hillary, I don't want you to be a quitter," to which I'm embarrassed to admit I responded, "All right. But if I don't like it at the end of the year, can I quit then?"

(LAUGHTER)

Well, I stuck it out and I am so glad I did, because my four years here were among the most exhilarating and informative of my life. And the friends that I made here have been the friends of a lifetime. They have sustained and supported me every step of the way on my journey, as I have tried to do for them.

And we started that journey at a tumultuous time in our nation's history. We were embroiled in a war that many of us opposed. Here at home, so many of our fellow citizens were marginalized and denied their most basic rights.

We were uneasy about our future, uncertain about America's role in the world, and unwilling to trust a government that didn't share our values.

Sounds kind of familiar, doesn't it?

(APPLAUSE)

But we were inspired by our Wellesley motto not to be ministered onto, but to minister, and we took it to heart, probably more than some of our professors and administrators at the time would have liked.

We protested the Vietnam War. We marched for civil rights. We fought to bring more minority students and faculty to Wellesley. And at the end of our four years, my classmates convinced our skeptical college president, Ruth Adams, to have the first ever student speaker at graduation and then they convinced me to do the honors.

(APPLAUSE)

Well, when the time came, President Adams introduced me as, and I quote, "cheerful, good humored, good company, and a good friend to all of us." I'm afraid she probably wanted to take it all back once I opened my mouth.

(LAUGHTER)

My thoughts on the indispensable task for criticizing and constructive protest wasn't exactly her idea of a commencement speech. Now, when I go back and read it today, I have to admit, it wasn't the world's most coherent address and I sort of cringe when I read that I actually said things like "coming to terms with our humanness and authentic reality and inauthentic reality."

(LAUGHTER)

I tell you, Wellesley gets into you and...

(APPLAUSE)

But I still believe as strongly today as I did then in my statement that politics is the art of making what appears to be impossible possible. That is what I have believed ever since I was a student here. That's what I have tried to do throughout my life, starting after law school, as when Maya said, I didn't want to go to work for a law firm, I didn't want to clerk for a judge.

I went to work instead for the Children's Defense Fund and my first assignment there was trying to figure out what we could do to get more kids into school.

I went to New Bedford, Massachusetts to try to figure out why there were so many children in the census who didn't appear on any school enrollment forms. And I went door to door and in home after home, I found children who were blind or deaf or in wheelchairs. They were kept home because the schools wouldn't or couldn't accommodate them.

They wanted to learn. They wanted to succeed. But they never had the chance. I knew then that I wanted to spend my career being a voice for children, children particularly who had been left behind, children who drew the short straw in life.

I wanted to fight to give them the same opportunities that I had growing up. And like many of my classmates and many of you, I did want to make a difference. Now, that wasn't always easy. Back then, women weren't always taken seriously back then.

When I was first deciding where to attend law school, I was invited to go, after I had been admitted to Harvard and Yale, to a cocktail reception for prospective students at the Harvard Law School and I knew a couple of the male students who were there and they were showing me around.

And we ran right into Professor Paper Chase, large, imposing, three-piece suit, watch chain, looking down at everyone, and one of my friends said, "Professor so-and-so, this is Hillary Rodham. She's trying to decide between us and our nearest competitor."

And he looked down at me and he said, "Well, first of all, we don't have a nearest competitor."

(LAUGHTER)

"And, secondly, we don't need any more women." So I decided to go to Yale.

(APPLAUSE)

There were 235 students, of whom just 27 were women, and today women are the majority of students in law schools.

(APPLAUSE)

As a young lawyer, when I once told a colleague that I wanted to practice litigation courtroom law, he replied that this was clearly impossible, because I didn't have a wife.

He asked me...

(LAUGHTER)

He asked me, totally seriously, "When you're in a long trial and you're so busy, who will make sure you have clean socks for court?"

I had honestly never thought about that.

(LAUGHTER)

I had always washed my own socks. And I have been thrilled to see women serving across America not only in the legal profession, but the medical profession, in academia and so much else.

But back then, the idea of a woman running for president would have been greeted with derisive laughter.

Well, times have changed. Despite the challenges we faced, we have found ways to serve our country in every way imaginable, in our professions, our communities and our families.

And looking at your generation, I see that same desire to give back. We saw it especially after September 11. While the president didn't ask us to do anything, except go shopping, which hardly ranks up there as a call to action and sacrifice from an American president, the young people of our country had other ideas.

Between 2000 and 2006, applications to teach for America nearly tripled. Between 2004 and 2006 alone, applications to the Americorps Vista program jumped 50 percent. And in recent years, the Peace Corps has seen the highest number of volunteers in three decades.

We've seen a resurgence of activism on college campuses. Students are Brown have created a sustainable foods initiative, organizing farmers' markets and convincing dining halls to switch to local foods.

Students at Keane State College in New Hampshire hosted a concert to raise money for victims of the genocide in Darfur.

Students at the University of New Hampshire are working to protect our environment by reducing energy and water use on campus.

And here at Wellesley, just recently, students organized a day of awareness and a rally to protest the unfair treatment of the Jena 6. They've also traveled to New Orleans to help rebuild after Hurricane Katrina and...

(APPLAUSE)

... I especially want to thank you for working together through a group called Sisters Keepers to help student mothers finish their education.

(APPLAUSE)

And to those who might sometimes here on television say that your generation is disengaged, that you're not as passionate and committed as we were, I say come to Providence, come to Keane, come to Durham, come to Wellesley, travel across our country, take the same opportunity that I've had to actually meet and talk with the young people of America, see how every day you're standing up, taking charge and making the impossible possible.

Unfortunately, for nearly seven years, we've had a president who hasn't been much of a partner in your work. If anything, he's actually created more work. He's undermined women's right and gay rights and appointed Supreme Court justices who chipped away at reproductive rights, undermined equal pay, and turned back the clock on school integration, decisions that will affect you and your children for decades to come.

He's continued to wage a war in Iraq that has taken more than 3,800 of our best and most dedicated young men and women and costs us more than $300 million a day, a bill that, again, you and your children will be paying, unless we reverse course.

He's run up our national debt to $9 trillion. So every baby born today starts life with $30,000 of debt on his or her tiny shoulders, a birth tax that will only increase for your children and grandchildren if we don't end this reckless spending.

He's waged a war on science, cutting off promising stem cell research, banning his own surgeon general from talking about contraception, failing to address the threat of global warming, that we know not only could, but is leading to increased storms and floods and heat waves and droughts, affecting millions of people across America and the world.

To paraphrase one of my most recent opponents, the philosopher, Stephen Colbert...

(APPLAUSE)

... this administration doesn't make decisions based on facts, it makes facts based on decisions.

(LAUGHTER)

As a result, my generation is in danger of being the first ever to leave America worse off than when we found it. And whether you're a Democrat or Republican, Independent, or you don't even care about politics, I think we can all agree that your generation, my daughter's generation deserves better than that.

The challenges you face today are no less profound than ones faced by previous generations of Americans and you deserve a president who will meet those challenges head on, a president who is committed to your future, a president who will never again play politics with women's health and women's rights, who will never again...

(APPLAUSE)

... who will never again put ideology over science and the cures and breakthroughs of the future, who will never again engage in reckless spending and stick you with the bill, who will confront the challenges that we face without fear or fear-mongering and leave America better off.

If you give me the chance and the honor, I will be that president for you.

(APPLAUSE)

I will start by making college affordable again so that middle class and hardworking families can go.

(APPLAUSE)

Back when I went to college, my father told me, "Here's the deal. Got enough money for your tuition and board, but anything beyond that, like buying books, you pay for yourself." And I had worked summers and holidays since I was 13, so I was fine with that.

But when I decided to go to law school and I told my father, he said, "Well, you're on your own for that one. That wasn't part of the deal."

So I kept working and I got a scholarship from Wellesley, the Vida Dutton Scudder scholarship, and I borrowed money from the federal government at a low interest rate. I didn't have to worry about some for-profit student loan company ripping me and my family off, raising the interest rates or changing the terms of the loan.

I didn't get stuck with a massive debt that would have derailed my dreams of a career in public service. When I'm president, I will restore that basic bargain. I proposed a new college tax credit that will cover more than 50 percent of the typical cost of public colleges and universities or the full cost of tuition for community colleges.

And for those who don't go to college, I think we should invest more in apprenticeships and job training and lifelong learning opportunities. There are so many...

(APPLAUSE)

There's so many hardworking young Americans, I think you probably know as many as I do, who don't go to college, but who deserve to have a shot at a high wage, high skill job, and we're going to have a lot of shortages in high skill jobs.

So we need to start doing more for them, as well. Let's start creating those jobs by investing in a new, clean energy industry and addressing the threat of global warming right now.

(APPLAUSE)

We all know the science. There's no longer a debate. Global warming is real. It's one of the greatest environmental, economic and international security threats we face, and I was, as I'm sure all of you were, so proud of Vice President Gore when he got the Nobel Prize for raising the alarm about global warming.

(APPLAUSE)

But we need a policy and that is what I will do as president. I'll create a $1 billion green building fund to build and renovate public buildings. We'll make buildings green and energy efficient. I want to establish a strategic energy fund paid for by a $50 billion investment in clean, renewable technologies by taking away the tax subsidies from the oil companies. They don't need them to make a profit.

(APPLAUSE)

Next week I'll be unveiling a broad agenda to address our energy and global warming challenges and I'll be talking a lot more about those issues all next week.

But today's challenges aren't just at home. We have to face those in order to make sure we have a strong and prosperous middle class. That has been the engine of economic growth in our country.

That's why we have to tackle energy. That's why we have to make college affordable. That's why we have to have an education system that starts with universal pre-kindergarten, that fixes the unfunded mandate of No Child Left Behind.

(APPLAUSE)

And that's why, finally, we need a health care system that provides quality, affordable health care for every single American.

(APPLAUSE)

But we know that our challenges are not just here at home. After nearly seven years of a stubborn, preemptive, go-it-alone foreign policy, we have our work cut out for us to restore our leadership around the world.

That starts with bringing our troops home from Iraq as responsibly and quickly as we can.

(APPLAUSE)

There is no military solution and we should not be asking our brave young men and women to serve as referees in their sectarian conflicts. It has to be done as carefully as possible, because it is dangerous withdrawing troops.

I've laid out may plans to bring our troops home from Iraq and demand that the Iraqis take responsibility for their own country, replace our military involvement with an intensive diplomatic initiative in the area.

And let me be clear, if George Bush doesn't end this war while he is president, when I am president, I will as quickly as I can.

(APPLAUSE)

But, unfortunately, our problems go far beyond Iraq. Take out the globe and look at it. We have alienated our friends and emboldened our enemies across the world. I have said I won't even wait until I'm inaugurated. The day after I'm elected, I will ask distinguished Americans of both parties to travel around the world with a new message, the era of cowboy diplomacy is over. We're going to start working with people again.

(APPLAUSE)

And, you know, I have come to a rather obvious conclusion based on my Wellesley education. You can't be a leader in the world if no one is following. And we have got to get back to leading, leading with our values, leading with moral authority, leading on behalf of bringing the world together, because when it comes to the challenges we face from global terrorism to global warming to global epidemics and global competition, we cannot do this all on our own.

And I want to lead the world to end the genocide in Darfur and we need to act immediately. Every day we fail to act is a betrayal of our common values.

As president, I will speed the deployment of a U.N. peacekeeping force. I will provide them with more support to do the job we're asking them to do and create real consequences for anyone who continues the bloodshed or obstructs the peace process.

We need to lead the world...

(APPLAUSE)

... to stop the brutal violence in Burma and insist that the regime release all political prisoners, including Aung San Suu Kyi.

(APPLAUSE)

We need to lead the world in fighting the AIDS epidemic that is creating a global generation of orphans and destabilizing countries. That's why I was proud to sign the pledge to invest $50 billion by 2013 to combat AIDS across the world. We need to lead the world...

(APPLAUSE)

We need to lead the world in standing up for women's rights. Twelve years ago, when the U.N. convened a historic conference on women in Beijing, I was proud to represent our country and proclaim to the world that women's rights are human rights, because when women...

(APPLAUSE)

... when women continue to be raped as a casualty of conflict, trafficked for commercial advantage, denied education and health care and family planning, not given access to credit, denied their rights as citizens, that not only affects them and their countries, that compromises the dignity and the human rights of the entire human family.

If we don't stand for women's rights, we will never stand for our best values. That has to be a part of American foreign policy.

(APPLAUSE)

We need to lead the world in providing opportunity to the world's children, because when 100 million children in the developing world don't attend school and 150 million more drop out before finishing first grade, that is a recipe for poverty, extremism and instability.

That's why I've introduced the bipartisan Education for All Act, $10 billion over five years toward the goal of basic education for every boy and girl around the world.

And, finally, we need to lead the world by living up to our values here at home. As we seek to promote the rule of law in other nations, we must accept it for ourselves. As we counsel liberty and justice for all, we cannot support torture and the indefinite detention of people we declare to be beyond the law.

(APPLAUSE)

I realize this is an ambitious agenda. Would you expect anything less from a Wellesley woman?

(APPLAUSE)

And I know I can't do it alone. I need your help. I am thrilled that we are launching 120 student chapters on college campuses across America today. We have a new Web site called Hillblazers at Www.Hillblazers.Com to help young people get organized.

And in the coming weeks, I need your help to make the calls, to knock on the doors and organize the events and talk to your friends and family. That's what I did back in 1968, when a group of my dear friends and I jumped in a car that one of us finagled to have on campus, and we would drive from Wellesley to Manchester, New Hampshire, stuffing envelopes and walking the precincts for Eugene McCarthy.

He was running for president on a platform of ending the Vietnam War. I am running for president, in part, on a platform to end the war in Iraq and most important of all, I need your help on election day. I need you to get the vote out and get your friends registered so they can vote.

In 2004, while the voter turnout rate for 18- to 34-year-olds was higher than in 2000, more than 25 million still never cast their votes, enough to possibly change the course of history.

For so long, young people have been ignored and silenced by others. Today, too many young people silence themselves. It's up to all of you to change that.

I know that politics can be frustrating, but it seems like we get bogged down in distractions and trivialization, who's up and who's down, people's hairstyle or their laugh or what they're wearing rather than what they're saying.

But in those moments when you think you're never going to break through the noise and you just want to give up, I urge you to think about all of the people who came before you. Many of them, we'll never know their names. They're lost to history. But so many others, we can read their stories, be amazed at their strength and their courage.

Think about those audacious women and a few brave men who gathered in Seneca Falls, New York for the declaration to issue the very first statement ever in the history of the world calling for women's full equality.

Elizabeth Cady Stanton, one of the key organizers, was just 32 years old. One attendee was just 15. It took more than 70 years for them to win the vote, more than 70 years of protesting, organizing, lobbying, going to jail, doing hunger strikes, chaining themselves to the gate in front of the White House, but they never gave up.

And just one woman from the Seneca Falls Convention lived long enough to actually cast a ballot.

Think about the civil rights movement. Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. was just 26 years old when he led the Montgomery bus boycott. My dear friend, Congressman John Lewis, was just 25 when he led that historic march across the bridge in Selma, a march that ended with teargas, hoses and the crack of night sticks against and his and others' skulls, as the marchers knelt down to pray.

Think about that. They were attacked as they knelt down to pray. They were, as Congressman Lewis put it later, using our bodies as a witness to the truth and they forced America to bear witness, as well.

They were willing to put their lives on the line and together they made the impossible possible.

I stand here today because of those brave men and women and I am inspired every day by the people I meet on the campaign trial. You know, the mothers and fathers who lift their little girls on their shoulders or lean over and whisper in their ears, "See, honey, in America, you can be anything you want to be."

The women in their 90s who come to my events, they stand there, they hold themselves up in a walker, they may be in a wheelchair, and as I meet them, they tell me, "I was born before women could vote and I want to live long enough to see a woman in the White House."

I know the challenges...

(APPLAUSE)

I know the challenges we face are daunting, but I still believe what I said in my commencement speech nearly 40 years ago. Fear is always with us, but we just don't have time for it, not now. So let's roll up our sleeves and get to work together.

We're ready to shatter that highest glass ceiling. It's what Americans have been doing for more than 200 years. It's what I believe has created the space for the transformative changes that we have been the beneficiaries of.

I think we're ready for that kind of change again. Change is just a word if you don't have the strength and experience to make it happen. I believe I do and I believe together we can make it.

We can make history. I like to think that it will be young people driven by Dr. King's fierce urgency of now who will make the difference in this election, because when I am president, my presidency is about your future. It is about what you will have to make your lives, to make your choices however you choose, to be responsible for yourselves, those whom you love, your communities, our country and the world.

There's a lot of work to do and I hope you will join me in doing that work.

Thank you all very, very much.

Thank you. Thank you all. Thank you so much.
I am so happy to be here at Plymouth State and to be with all of you. To have a conversation about what is at stake in this election and I want to thank my friend and your senator Deb Reynolds. Deb is so committed to representing her constituents and trying to come up with creative good ideas that will make a difference for them. I also want to recognize and thank someone else who is here, who is the speaker of the House of Representatives in NH, Speaker Terie Norelli. (Applause)

And President Sarah James Dean, thank you for welcoming me to this campus, President Dean has the great privilege of being able to preside over a campus whose reputation is so excellent and growing and whose students go on to do so many important things on behalf of New Hampshire, our country and the world. And I want to thank Trevor, Trevor Tanridge, student body president, thank you for welcoming us and thank you for having this student sponsored series that is going to be taking place here at Plymouth State. I think that's a terrific idea and I congratulate you and everyone who worked with you on it. We're going to have a conversation today and we're going to start by talking about an issue that might be of particular interest to all of you and your families and that is college affordability. How we can do more to make college affordable for hardworking young people and their families. I have a couple of people with me who you will meet in a minute who are going to really illustrate some of the challenges that students and families here in NH and across the Country face when it comes to affording college. Ill be introducing them in a few minutes. But I thank them for being part of this discussion.

After we finish talking about college affordability we're going to throw it open for you to ask any questions you are interested in because I know how important this election is for the future and in fact it is probably more important for the future of the students here than for the rest of us because the next President will make decisions to chart the course of our country through much of the 21st century. Now I obviously believe that among the tasks of the next President will be reversing the damage that has been done by our current President. We won't be moving forward with confidence and competence into the future, tackling the challenges we face, understanding that there is no guarantee and we will remain a great nation with a growing economy and shared prosperity and the opportunities available that were present for previous generations unless we do the work that is necessary to make that happen. And one of the key to a strong and confident America is a system of higher education that is acceptable to all who are motivated to seek it out. And yet as I travel across our country, I have confirmation every day about how much more difficult it is for many students to afford to start college, continue college and graduate from college than it was 20 or 30 years ago. But I'd like to start off with a few questions. How many of you have ever worried about whether you could afford college or if your family members whether the young people in your family could afford college? How many of you have ever had to worry about that. That's a lot of hands. How many of you have taken out college loans. How many of you are totally baffled by the college loaned format?

How many of you have ever wondered how we're going to pay back those loans? Well, we don't exactly make it easy for you, do we? College costs are up 35 percent in the last five years alone. The average student graduates with $20,000 in debt.

That number is even higher in New Hampshire. New Hampshire has one of the highest costs of college in the country. Therefore, students graduate with higher debt.

Higher education has never been more of a financial burden, but in today's global economy it's never been more important. Graduates from four-year colleges earn nearly twice as much as high school graduates, an estimated $1 million more over a lifetime.

Forty-two percent of all new jobs this decade will require some post-secondary education. That's a big jump from even six and a half years ago, when it was only about 29 percent.

Countries across the world, from Japan to South Korea, from Canada to Ireland, are educating their young people at higher rates than we are in America. That is news.

Our higher education system has historically been the envy of the world. We know that in other countries (inaudible) the future was determined at the age of 12 or 16. But they have changed, and they now value college much more, and the rates of young people going to college are actually higher than we have now in America. And China and India are not far behind.

When it comes to higher education, we should not be playing catch-up with the world, we should continue to be leading, because the skills and knowledge of our workforce will determine whether America can compete and win in the 21st century.

Americans work harder than anybody in the world. When you measure productivity, which is a term for determining how much output we get per hour, per worker, Americans are by far the hardest-working people.

But there is a mismatch between what Americans are being compensated for in terms of all that hard work and whether our skills are keeping up with the new job challenges that await us.

This is at the heart of what I've been talking about this week. How can we rebuild the road to a strong and prosperous middle class in America?

After what this administration has done the last six and a half years, it will not be an easy task.

I believe we need a new beginning, so I've been outlining how I would change course, how I would change course in education, how I would change course in the economy, how I would change course in heath care, how I would change course in Iraq and our policy around the world.

I started talking about an economic blueprint for a 21st century economy. We've got to create more jobs. I think we can do that if we had a serious set of policies to address energy independent and global warming.

Thank you so much, Maggie, for that wonderful introduction and for your student leadership and concern about all of these issues and I'm delighted that your family could be here with you to see the excellent presentation you just made.
And I want to thank Dr. Dianne Bystrom for her outstanding leadership as well. And to the Catt Center and Iowa State for hosting this event -- and for all their work to promote and celebrate women in politics.

I also want to recognize Bonnie Campbell, Iowa's former Attorney General, Elaine Baxter, Iowa's former Secretary of State, and all of the elected officials who are here. Also, Christie Vilsack, former First Lady, and my many friends who have gathered here for this occasion- including some of my friends from Arkansas who are travelling around Iowa this week. And especially to the students and faculty of Iowa State. Its wonderful being here and having this honor to actually talk for a few minutes about women and politics and women in politics.

I could say that it's a pleasure being up here with all of the women running for President in 2008. But I'd like to make a prediction: that while there may be plenty of room on this stage tonight -- some day, there will be enough of us to transform this event from a lecture into a debate.



Finally, I want to thank the members of Mary Louise Smith's family who have joined us tonight. Talk about a trailblazing woman in public life. Mary Louise Smith started at the grassroots right here in Iowa, working her way up to become the first woman Chair of the Republican National Committee. This was not an easy feat for a woman in 1974. But with her signature poise, and her intelligence and integrity, Mary Louise Smith proved to be more than up to the challenge.

In addition to being an accomplished organizer and leader, she was also a passionate advocate for women's rights, reproductive choice, and many other important causes. She was a role model and an inspiration for many, and I am honored by this chair that bears her name.

And of course, there is this Center's namesake, the great Carrie Chapman Catt. I and every other woman who holds this chair does so in part because of her life's work. Raised right here in Iowa, a graduate of this university, she served as a teacher, a school principal, a superintendent, and a reporter before joining the women's suffrage movement and realizing her talents as a gifted organizer and dynamic orator.

She did two stints as President of the National American Woman Suffrage Association and she helped to found the International Woman Suffrage Alliance to reach out to women across the world. In the end, it was Catt who devised the "Winning Plan" for the suffrage movement -- a plan to campaign simultaneously for suffrage at both the state and national levels. The rest, as they say, is history.

And it really is quite a history, isn't it? There has never been a better time to be a woman in America. It's almost hard to explain to young women today how much things have changed -- even just during the course of my lifetime.

Growing up, there were sports we couldn't play, schools we couldn't attend, and jobs that essentially had a "men only" sign on them.

As an eighth grader I was captivated by space-travel. I wrote to NASA asking how to apply to be an astronaut -- they wrote back explaining that these positions weren't open to women.

Well today, Iowa's own Peggy Whitson has been appointed the first female Commander of the International Space Station.



Years later, when I was deciding where I wanted to attend law school, I was coolly informed by a Harvard Law professor, and I quote, "We don't need any more women at Harvard." So I went to Yale. [laughter] And my entering class at Yale Law School -- where I decided to go instead -- had 235 students, of whom just 27 were women.

Today, women are the majority of students in law schools.

As a young lawyer, when I told a colleague that I might want to practice courtroom law, he replied that, that was impossible, because I didn't have a wife. He asked me, "When you're in trial, and you're busy, who will make sure you have clean socks for court?" [laughter] Well, I had honestly had never thought about that. I had always washed my own socks. [laughter]

Today, women are serving across America as judges, partners, as law professors -- and yes, even successful courtroom lawyers with clean socks.

The norms are changing on Capitol Hill. Back in the mid-1980s, women were not allowed to wear pantsuits on the Senate floor. Clearly, I would not have survived. [laughter]

And today, we've sworn in the first Madame Speaker of the House of Representatives.



We've even seen, much I'm sure to that old Harvard law professor's chagrin, the first woman President of Harvard University.

Women are now a majority of students in colleges -- and the majority of those who voted in 2004. It is nothing short of breathtaking when you stop to think about it.

But all of this progress is not a quirk of fate. It didn't happen by accident. It is the result of the contributions of women and men from every background, serving at every level, using their diverse array of skills and talents to move our nation forward.

Contributions from national leaders like Carrie Chapman Catt and her colleagues in the suffrage movement. Trailblazers right here in Iowa like Arabella Mansfield who, in 1869, became the first woman in America formally admitted to the Bar. Women like Sojourner Truth who campaigned both against slavery and for women's suffrage. Or Harriet Tubman who risked her life time and again so others could taste the fruits of freedom. Courageous women around the world like Aung San Suu Kyi who has been a virtual prisoner for decades in the cause of freedom for the Burmese people. Women who run for office in their own countries against some tough odds like Angela Merkel in Germany and Michelle Bachelet in Chile, and Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf in Liberia.

But it is not just the women leaders in the history books who've made history. It is also those unsung heroes who transform lives and communities every single day.

The teachers who tell our daughters, "You are just as smart and capable as the boys, don't you fail to live up to your potential." I think about my 6th grade teacher Mrs. King quoting from the Bible said not to hide your light under the bushel basket.

The women on the PTA who wonder why aren't more girls in those honors math and science classes. I remember when my daughter was in first grade joining up with a couple of other mothers to do extra science programs for our first graders. And all those mothers who work all day -- sleep a few hours -- do the night shift, because they want something better for their children.

Some women have fought lonely battles, forging ahead on their own when no one else would stand by their side. I think of Edna Griffin, called the "Rosa Parks of Iowa." On July 7, 1948, she was refused service at a Des Moines lunch counter. But Edna Griffin responded by organizing pickets in front of the store -- and when no one else joined her, she would picket alone. She took her case all the way to the Iowa Supreme Court -- and she won.

Other women have had the benefit of networks of women drawn together by shared experiences and aspirations. I've had the privilege of traveling to more than 80 countries. And everywhere I've been as First Lady and now as Senator, I have tried to find time to meet with women in the countries where I find myself- to ask them what their lives are like, what kind of opportunities and challenges they face. I remember a woman in Northern Ireland by the name of Joyce McCartan. Joyce, a Catholic, had lost more than a dozen family members during the so called "troubles" -- including her own seventeen-year old son who was shot dead by Protestant gunmen. But instead of retreating into anger and grief and wanting revenge, she brought together a group of both Protestant and Catholic women to set up a safe house for women of both traditions to talk about their needs and their fears over cups of tea.

I sat down with those women one day and I listened as they talked about how they had discovered that they all worried when their husbands and sons left their homes, and they were all relieved when they returned safely. And despite their differences, they wanted a better future for their country and their children. It was these women -- and others like them -- sitting around at kitchen tables, sharing pots of tea, who helped chart the path to peace.

Here at home, during my time in the Senate, I have cherished the opportunity to work with my women colleagues in both Houses and on both sides of the aisle. Now we may not see eye to eye on everything, but we get together and we trade those very important bits of advice like what kind of shoes to wear on marble floors when you're on your feet all day. And when it comes to the issues that we can agree on -- whether it's afterschool funding or healthcare and education for women here in America or for women in Afghanistan-- we are a force to be reckoned with.

I've been honored to work throughout my career on issues like foster care and adoption, family leave, equal pay and preschool for our children. And I have always been struck when people label these as women's issues. I disagree with that characterization. While these so-called "kitchen table" issues are certainly women's issues -- they're also men's issues and children's issues. They're issues that we all have a stake in.

Today, too many men have to choose between health insurance for themselves or for their children, because they can't afford both.

When women make just 77 cents for every dollar a man earns -- it's not just women who are affected, but families with less income to pay the bills.

We're all worried about whether the next generation of children will have the tools they need to compete in the global economy.

Today, many fathers are struggling to spend more time with their families just like mothers always have. In fact, the issue of family leave provides a particularly good example. I'll never forget a newspaper advice column that I read in the early 1980s. I was working at a law firm at the time and my daughter was about three years old. Someone had written into this column asking: "I'm about to get a big promotion and I'm going to have my own office for the first time. What kind of decorations are appropriate for my office?"

Well, the advice columnist responded that he needed to know if the writer was a man or a woman because it would affect the answer. If you're a man, he said, and you have a family, put up lots of pictures of your family because people will think when they come into your office "this is a stable person with a good set of family values." But if you're a woman, don't put any pictures of your family in your office because people will think you can't keep your mind on your job.

So, of course, I immediately filled my office with pictures of my family.

Well, a lot has changed since then. But unfortunately this attitude is still around. It kind of sums up too many people's feelings towards women and parents in the workplace: Keep your family life to yourself, struggle on your own to meet the demands of work and family and don't let it affect your work.

But think about this for a minute. A lot of working fathers wish they had more time with their children. All employers want employees to be focused and productive -- which is hard to achieve when work and family are out of balance. And every American has a stake in how the next generation is raised -- after all, we're raising our future innovators, our college professors, our nurses, our business leaders, our farmers, teachers and so much more.

So when we fight to strengthen family leave -- that helps not just women, but all Americans who want to spend more time with the people they love and care for. That's why I'm fighting for paid family leave -- because no one should have to worry if they need a couple of hours to take their child to the doctor. And no one should be denied the chance to bond with their newborn or adopted baby or to care for an aging parent. I think we should encourage the development of families working to take care of one another. There's so much care giving that goes on in our country, we sometimes overlook it. But if all the caregivers, people who devote most or all of their time caring for a child, caring for a parent, caring for a loved one with a disability, if all of those Americans were to decide tomorrow to stop giving that out of love, to replace that care would cost 300 billion dollars a year. People give it because they love, they have a sense of family obligation, they want to do the right thing and we make it very, very hard for families to care for one another.

Instead of focusing on what is really going on in people's lives, too often our politics is about distractions. Who's up, who's down. What people are wearing more than what they are saying.

Well, there will always be that kind of analysis. But in the end, none of that really matters very much.

What matters are the lives of people I meet every day who feel like they're invisible. Like no one's paying attention to them and their struggles.

Like the woman I met from LeClair who had to sell half her family farm to pay for her family's medical bills. She sure feels invisible.

Or the woman I met at the Maid-Rite in Toledo who was working two jobs and still struggling to get by and she wonders whether anybody really sees how hard she's been working.

The woman in Greenville whose daughter got sick, but didn't have health insurance. She died a year later. She was just eighteen years old. Her death certificate listed the cause of death as unknown, because she was never able to afford to get a proper diagnosis.

Well, I don't think that any of these people should be invisible in our country. They're certainly not invisible to me. I see them, I hear them, and I carry their stories with me where ever I go. And they shouldn't be invisible in our political process.

One of the aspects of politics that has changed dramatically with the entry of some many women is that a lot of these stories are now just out there, people are talking about them, trying to determine what to do to give someone who is struggling a better chance. When I think about the struggle that women had to even get the vote I don't get discouraged, I get inspired.

The first women's convention was held in Seneca Falls, New York in 1848. It was a hot July and a group of women decided that they wanted to meet together at the Wesleyan Chapel in Seneca Falls to see if they could draft a statement claiming their rights as women. At that time of course our laws didn't really give women rights in any aspect of life, not just at the voting booth but in inheritance and marriage and child custody and so much else. So these women and a few brave men joined together on that hot July day to begin a process that led to the Declaration of Sentiments. It was the first document that we know of anywhere in the world where a group of people had come and said women deserve their rights. Only one woman who was there are that convention lived long enough to see women get the vote in America. It took more than 70 years from the start of the movement until nineteenth amendment was passed. More than 70 years of faith and devotion, protesting and lobbying. And when I think about the challenges we face today in politics, I always am in awe of how hard these other women had to struggle to get what we take for granted.

Ultimately, they did succeed, because even in the face of the most heartbreaking set-backs, they never lost sight of what mattered and they refused to give up.

I've always loved the story of how, back in 1915, Catt and her colleagues believed that winning in New York was critical to winning at the federal level, so they fought their hearts out. They held 10,300 meetings. They handed out seven and a half million leaflets. And they raised nearly $100,000 -- a staggering sum in those days.

But in the end, they lost by nearly 200,000 votes.

That night, Catt was asked how long this defeat would delay their fight nationally. She replied, "Only until we can get a little sleep." And two days after that loss, they started a new campaign with a new slogan: "Victory in 1917."

I'm grateful to her and countless others because I know that every day I walk in the paths they cleared and benefit from the victories they won.

Now, some might say that their work is finished in America since women no longer face legal obstacles to education or employment or the right to vote. But we know that even though legal barriers have fallen away -- economic and attitudinal ones still remain. And that so long as there are gaps between our aspirations and our reality, their work and ours is not finished. That more perfect union still awaits.

If we truly want to finish what Catt and her colleagues had started, then it is time we stopped paying women 77 cents on the dollar when they work 60 minutes of the hour, just like men.



We can see that we are still not where we need to be because just this year the United States Supreme Court heard a case of a woman named Lilly Ledbetter. Lilly Ledbetter worked in a factory in Alabama. She worked there for over 20 years. She was a good worker. She became a supervisor- the only woman to become a supervisor and year after year she did the same work that all of the male supervisors did. And about 20 years into her work she learned she had never been paid the same as all of the men. Men with lesser seniority, younger men, and she wondered why. And she tried to find out and basically her employer wouldn't answer her questions. And Lilly Ledbetter didn't want to take that for an answer. So she started talking to people in town and somebody sent her to a lawyer and the lawyer said that's against the Equal Pay Act, we've had an Equal Pay Act on the books since 1963- they can't do that. The lawyer called the factory and the factory wouldn't talk to the lawyer so the lawyer brought a law suit. And Lilly Ledbetter won in court and the factory appealed it. And she won in the appellate court and the factory appealed it to the Supreme Court. The Supreme Court has changed in composition as you know and all of a sudden after everyone thought that the cases had been settled, that if you were discriminated for doing the same job as a woman that a man is doing you are entitled to back pay for as long as you have been doing that job as a way to deter other employers from practicing discrimination and to make good on the many hours of work that were not fairly compensated. Well, the new Supreme Court found a reason to deny Lilly Ledbetter back pay for all of those years. They came up with a theory that nobody had ever heard of before. So don't believe that the hard work is over- we still have a long way to go.

If we truly want to finish what Catt and her colleagues started, then it's time we did more than just talking about family values -- we need to adopt policies that truly value families.

We stand for universal pre-kindergarten all the way through to affordable college.

From quality, affordable healthcare for every American to retirement security for every American. Paid leave. Flexible workplaces.

We need to recognize the challenges that so many people face today. You know, the economy is much more difficult. The average American family has lost a thousand dollars in income in the last six years but the costs of everything else have gone up- health care, education, energy and gas. It's much tougher for young families to really pull together the time they need for each other.

The biggest concern that a lot of young families tell me is that they don't have enough time. They're working as hard as they can, they're worried about their future, they're anxious about everything from whether they have enough to put away to tide them over on a rainy day to what happens in the mortgage market and what's going on if somebody in their family gets sick.

If we truly want to finish what Catt and her colleagues started, then we need to do something about our national debt -- $9 trillion and counting.

Every baby born today starts life with $30,000 of debt on his or her tiny shoulders, the largest birth tax in history.

And if we truly want to finish the work that Carrie Chapman Catt and her colleagues started, then we must truly use the power of the vote to make our voices heard. To take our leaders to task. To build the kind of future we want for our children and grandchildren.

In 2004, more than 35 million women did not vote. You know, for so long, Carrie Chapman Catt and all the women who worked with her were silenced by others. Today, too many women silence themselves.

As Catt once said, "The vote is a power, a weapon of offense and defense, a prayer. Understand what it means and what it can do for your country."

Today, more than ever, we know what the vote can do for our country. I meet people who are ready to use it who have never used it before. I'm always struck when someone tells me they're voting for the first time. Often it's a young person turning 18. Sometimes it's a much older person who has just never registered and never voted. And then I meet people who never miss an election. They believe it's their duty and responsibility to show up whenever the polls are open. I've meet a lot of women in their nineties who've told me they were born before women could vote, and they want to live long enough to see a woman in the White House.

And I love it when I hear mothers and fathers whispering to their little girls, "See honey, in this country you can be anything you want to be." Well, that's what I believe about our sons and our daughters. There should be no limits on any of our children in America. But we have to do the hard work to make sure that is true. And all too often, people give up their beliefs and convictions because they don't vote leaving the field free to those who may not share their views, don't care about the same issues that they care about, but are willing to be there when it counts. We need to do everything we can to heed Carrie Chapman Catt's admonition to "Roll up your sleeves and set your mind to making history"

That's what Americans have been doing for over 200 years. It wasn't by accident that the first meeting ever held in the world to talk about and write down what rights women were entitled to happened in America. We have to keep faith with the work, the struggle and the sacrifice of those who have come before. We have to be reminded from time to time that freedom isn't free and equality cannot be taken for granted. Every generation faces new challenges and every generation has to step up and be heard and exercise their constitutional rights to make a difference.

That's what we do when we're at our best in America. I want Americans to start acting like Americans again. We face a lot of challenges here at home and around the world. We need to set big goals, goals that will bring out the best in our country, goals that will unite us, goals that will respect each and every one of us and cherish the contribution that we can make to this great nation. I know that there's a lot of work to be done but I relish the opportunity to be part of making history with all of you because this country deserves the very best that each and every one of us can offer.

Thank you all very, very much.

Thank you all very much. It is a real pleasure to be here and I appreciate those kind words. It's wonderful being back in the city - and to have a chance to come here again, I believe for the fourth time, and to have a chance to speak with you about an issue that is on the minds of everyone, whether I'm here in New York or in New Hampshire, or in Iowa or any of the other places I've been traveling to lately. It's a topic of conversation that has to be put at the top of our nation's agenda.
Now we know that not far from here Wall Street is humming. The phones are ringing, the blackberries are buzzing. And people are making billions of transactions that raise capital for corporations and deliver value to shareholders every day.

And what happens on Wall Street today - like every day - will ripple across the country and the world. I'm proud to represent New York, to represent the financial capital of the world. I see a lot of people who I recognize in this audience that are integral to what happens in our markets, how we create wealth, how we provide a dynamic economy that will hold out the promise of a better life for so many of our fellow citizens, but indeed for people far flung from here. I do want to recognize Speaker Silver, Shelly Silver, thank you very much for being here with me.

And we in New York, probably more than anyone anywhere, know how critically important is it for our economy and for the global economy, that Wall Street stay on the cutting edge of finance and remain what it always has been, the global finance capital of the world. But we know that the standard for any economic system is not just that it creates growth, but that it lifts up families across America who work hard and dream big every day.

As we've seen the home foreclosure crisis these past few years build, the ripples from Wall Street we know, can have a significant impact on families far away in Pahrump, Nevada, where I recently was and other places that might never give much of a thought to what goes on here, but whose daily lives will be impacted. As we've seen with the home foreclosure crisis, too many American families are not sharing in the growth that is created and driven from this city.

Now, productivity has risen 18 percent among American workers over the past six years, yet wages have stayed flat, and family incomes have fallen by nearly $1,000. There are five million more people in poverty here in our country than there were in 2000.

On top of stagnant wages, we've seen a rise in economic anxiety. Students struggling with the skyrocketing cost of college, families burdened by health care costs, premiums have doubled in the last six years, and we see the increasing role that energy prices play in people's lives.

Gas prices have doubled in the past seven years. Home heating costs continue to rise. In fact, the typical family is paying $2,000 more for energy this year than in 2000. That's like a $2,000 energy tax - more than 3 times what the typical family got under the Bush tax cuts.

We've seen people hit hard by a deepening housing crisis. Families who've worked hard, thought they were doing the right thing. Who've spent years scrimping and saving to buy a house, but their dream of homeownership has turned into a nightmare of escalating payments and threatening letters.

In short, we've seen too many middle class families struggling in an economy that is simply not working for them right now. An economy that, in recent months, has been the subject of increasingly worrisome headlines about weakening consumer confidence, about a declining dollar and ballooning national debt.

Now these economic problems are certainly not all Wall Street's fault - not by a long shot. But the reality of our interconnected economy is that what happens on Wall Street impacts main streets across America. It happens sometimes within minutes, sometimes over the course of months or even years.

If we're honest, we need to acknowledge that Wall Street has played a significant role in the current problems, and in particular in the housing crisis. A "see no evil" policy that financed irresponsible mortgage lending. A bond rating system riddled with conflicts of interest. A habit of issuing complex and opaque securities that even Wall Street itself doesn't seem to understand.

I believe we need a new beginning in our economic policy - one that strengthens our middle class and ensures that prosperity is widely shared, and is based on an ethic of shared responsibility. A new beginning that makes Wall Street shoulder its responsibility for this crisis, and that gives homeowners the breathing room they need. One that makes the most well-off among us pay our fair share and gives the middle class the help it needs for education, health care, and retirement security.

Our economy has been at risk by investment schemes aimed at making not just a few, but many extra dollars, and we need to start insisting on the right rules and transparency so this doesn't happen again.

So I'm here today to call on Wall Street to do its part - to help end the foreclosure crisis that is devastating middle class families and threatening the health of our economy.

Wall Street needs to be part of a comprehensive solution that brings to the table all those responsible and calls on them to do their part. Wall Street helped create the foreclosure crisis, and Wall Street needs to help us solve it.

Let's start with an honest, clear-eyed assessment of what went so terribly wrong.

Over the past seven years, as incomes fell and wages stagnated, many families were lured into risky mortgages with rates that later jumped beyond what they could afford. Now, we can debate what was technically illegal; we can debate what should be defined as predatory. But there is no debate that what happened did not reflect the best of our financial system.

It did not reflect prudence, transparency, or even an understanding that behind large bundles of securitized mortgages are real families who were led into bad situations by people who should have, and even did, know better.

As a result, 1.8 million foreclosure notices have gone out this year, an increase of 74 percent from last year. And the worst may be yet to come. The rates on 2 million mortgages are set to escalate over the next two years. Meanwhile, there's been an unprecedented national decline in home values.

Middle class families can't afford to refinance their loans, and it's gotten a lot harder to sell their homes. Many families are finding themselves trapped - stuck with mortgages they can't pay and expenses they can't meet.

So they're facing wrenching choices: pay their medical bills - or pay their mortgage. Put off retirement - or lose their homes. And many people who worked s hard and did try to follow the rules are receiving that same grim letter in the mail that says "get out now."

I met a woman in Derry, New Hampshire - a stay-at-home mom with three children - whose husband lost his good-paying job. He was in the computer industry. They kept making their loan payments for six months after he was laid off, but just at that time, their interest rate ballooned from about 8 percent to about 11 percent.

They tried to file for bankruptcy, but the bank still foreclosed on their home. And even after her husband found a new, high-paying job within a year, they were unable to make their back payments. Basically the door was shut in their face. When I met her, it was literally the day before her family was being forced out of their home with nowhere to go.

As the foreclosures mount, the housing crisis is also becoming a municipal crisis. Cities and towns face the prospect of blight, higher crime rates, vacant properties marring neighborhoods, cutting tax receipts, and dragging down property values.

And I believe the housing crisis also threatens the economy as a whole. Even Americans who don't face foreclosures are feeling the impact. 60 percent of the total wealth of middle class families resides in their home equity. And home equity withdrawals accounted for more than 8 percent of families' disposable income in 2005.

So as housing prices decline, people have less money to draw on for everything else, from medical bills to car payments to college tuition. We know that consumers are the backbone of our economy that has been true from the beginning. It's been especially true in the last years. And right now consumers are hurting. I talked with CEOs of the some of our large discount retailers. They tell me that the amount of money being spent is down. The number of shopping days has decreased. People come in the beginning of the month when they actually get paid and in the middle of the month but otherwise they're much scarcer as consumers than they used to be.

With the holidays quickly approaching, a lot of middle class families are feeling the pinch. And the global financial markets are also suffering. Risky loans have been packaged and sold around the world. Mortgage companies have collapsed. Financial firms have recorded losses in the tens of billions, and there's predictions for tens of billions more. Central banks have had to step in to keep the system running. And banks are reluctant to give out loans, so companies are finding it harder and harder to get the capital they need to grow and create new jobs even if they're not in the home industry.

Now, who's exactly to blame for the housing crisis? Well, that's always a question that the press and people ask and I think there's plenty of blame to go around.

Responsibility belongs to mortgage lenders and brokers, who irresponsibly lowered underwriting standards, pushed risky mortgages, and hid the details in the fine print.

Responsibility belongs to the Administration and to regulators, who failed to provide adequate oversight, and who failed to respond to the chorus of reports that millions of families were being taken advantage of.

Responsibility belongs to the rating agencies, who woefully underestimated the risks involved in mortgage securities.

And certainly borrowers share responsibility as well. Homebuyers who paid extra fees to avoid documenting their income should have known they were getting in over their heads. Speculators who were busy buying two, three, four houses to sell for a quick buck don't deserve our sympathy.

But finally, responsibility also belongs to Wall Street, which not only enabled but often encouraged reckless mortgage lending. Mortgage lenders didn't have balance sheets big enough to write millions of loans on their own. So Wall Street originated and packaged the loans that common sense warned might very well have ended in collapse and foreclosure. Some people might say Wall Street only helped to distribute risk. I believe Wall Street shifted risk away from people who knew what was going on onto the people who did not.

Wall Street may not have created the foreclosure crisis, but Wall Street certainly had a hand in making it worse.

We also must recognize, though, that good things have happened in the housing market. Home ownership is at the heart of the American Dream, and ownership rates rose to a record 69 percent in 2006. That means millions of new stakeholders in their communities. And the largest gains were among low-income and minority families.

The challenge for us is to preserve the best of this system - which has allowed people to own their own homes - while getting rid of the abuses. And to do that, we need to look at this problem, as complex as it is, honestly. We also need a President who understands the complexity and magnitude of the challenges we face because obviously it's not only about the mortgage industry and the credit crunch, it's about our debt, about the declining dollar, about all the challenges we face in the global economy. I'm confident we can navigate through this but we can't do so acting like ostriches or in a fit of denial. We have to be willing to roll up our sleeves and start doing what we do better than anybody in the world and that is solving problems.

Earlier this week, I wrote to Treasury Secretary Paulson urging him to fashion an agreement with the mortgage industry and Wall Street that matches the scale of the problem. I'm heartened that the Administration has heeded an earlier call of mine to convene a "crisis conference" of housing stakeholders - lenders, investors, mortgage servicers, regulators, representatives of homeowners, and others - to convert unworkable mortgages into stable loans that families can afford.

This is a moment for shared responsibility in America. Investors, lenders, and homeowners all have a part to play and sacrifices to make. If the agreement is inadequate, or the talks fail outright, the cost to our economy will only increase.

For this "crisis conference" to succeed, Wall Street must be on board. Wall Street has a responsibility for the past as well as an enormous stake in the future. So today, I'm calling on investors who control the mortgages that need modifying to be part of the solution. You are at the end of a long chain of decision-making and responsibility. But without your cooperation, a voluntary solution can be of limited effectiveness.

I urge Wall Street and the mortgage industry to voluntarily agree to the following three steps:

First, we need a moratorium of at least 90 days on foreclosures of subprime, owner-occupied homes. The moratorium will stop foreclosures until lenders and servicers have contacted borrowers and frozen mortgage rates. It will also give financial counselors time to work with families.

Second, we need to freeze the monthly rate on subprime adjustable rate mortgages, with the freeze lasting at least five years until the mortgages have been converted into affordable, fixed-rate loans.

A rate freeze is critical. An average of $30 billion in loans will reset each month next year, and the average reset will increase monthly payments by 30 to 40 percent. These rate resets are the major driver of the foreclosure costs.

The long rate-freeze will give the housing market time to stabilize. It will give families an opportunity to rebuild equity in their homes. It will also give the mortgage industry the time - and incentive - to convert mortgages that were designed to fail into loans that actually can be repaid.

Third, the mortgage industry must provide status reports on the number of mortgages it is modifying. Accountability is essential. Despite all the media coverage, despite all the hearings, despite the Secretary of the Treasury, despite all that has gone on in the last 30 to 60 days, the mortgage industry has only modified about 1 percent of at-risk mortgages this year. That' is simply not enough.

Now, I hope everyone will voluntarily agree to these steps, because we cannot fail at this. The costs are just too high.

If we cannot reach a voluntary agreement, I will consider legislation to address the problem. Mortgage servicers can work with borrowers to modify their mortgages. In the process, they can save families their homes, save investors from losses down the road, and help the economy.

But this is unchartered territory for them, and many are worried about opening themselves up to lawsuits from the investors who actually own the loans. I'm prepared to consider giving legal protection to servicers and others who administer these loans and who do the right thing by balancing the interests of homeowners, the investors, and our economy.

All of these proposals build on the work I've done throughout this year to urge immediate action on problems regarding housing. I've called on the mortgage industry to observe a "foreclosure timeout." I've put forward a plan to crack down on unscrupulous mortgage brokers, to end lending abuses, and expand the financial counseling programs that have been shown to reduce defaults and foreclosures.

I've proposed that we allow the state housing finance agencies to issue tax-exempt bonds to help families refinance their mortgages. On Monday, the Bush Administration said it will give this idea a try, and I'm pleased to hear that. But I wish they'd done it when I proposed it two months - and more than 225,000 foreclosure notices ago.

While we work to solve the immediate housing problem, I am also calling on the Administration, the regulators, and the mortgage industry to ensure that the abuses of recent years don't happen again.

We need an industry-wide commitment to tightening underwriting standards and disclosure obligations. We need to vigorously enforce federal prohibitions against abusive lending practices. And we need to eliminate prepayment penalties. This has been one of the most heart breaking elements of this crisis. I did an event about this down in Orlando, Florida early last spring talking with a lot of homeowners who had gotten into sub-prime mortgages. They fit the profile - many were first time homeowners. One got in trouble because he thought he was doing the right thing. His family and everyone told him, "Well as much money as you can save, pay off the loan as fast as possible." So he began putting more and more money aside to begin paying over what his mortgage payment was only to find out he had triggered the prepayment penalties and found himself with an increasing interest rate that forced him into foreclosure.

We obviously need to clean up the standards and make all of the disclosures much more understandable to everyone but we do need to prosecute mortgage servicing fraud and foreclosure rescue fraud to the fullest extent of the law. And we certainly need to expand financial counseling for homeowners and buyers.

What I'm proposing is a comprehensive "work out" - not a "bail out" - of our most pressing economic problem. And I do hope that many of you here and a lot of our leaders on Wall Street will join with me and others in helping to find these solutions. I was pleased that Mayor Bloomberg announced today a fund that will be a non-profit fund along the lines that I've been advocating to help homeowners here in the city facing foreclosure. Because addressing this issue with the right leadership and a commitment to shared responsibility will solve the problem.

But let's remember that addressing the housing crises is only one piece of what has to become a broader agenda for creating shared prosperity for Americans again.

That's why I've put forward a package of middle class tax cuts that will help restore the basic American bargain. If you work hard you can get ahead - with dignified work, a college education, affordable health care, child care, savings and wealth creation. We need to change our tax code to reward middle class families and by doing so, we can get money into the pockets of tens of millions of people who will spend it.

I also will extend middle class tax cuts, including the child tax credit, the marriage penalty relief. I want to give generous tax credits to help families afford health care. My plan called the American Health Choices plan includes health care tax credits so that individuals and small businesses will be able to afford health care through the congressional plan that I will open up to everyone. It's a really good plan. It's not government medicine, it is government-administered and Congress people love it. You get more than 250 choices at an average cost that is less than what you can find through your employer or in the market place. Unfortunately it is limited to federal employees. By increasing the pool dramatically we will lower costs and be able to deal with some of the other cost drivers in the health care system. I'll also offer up to $1,000 in matching tax cuts to help families save for retirement.

We also have a savings crisis. We have the lowest rate of savings since 1929 and coincidentally we have the highest income inequality gap since 1929. That was not a good year for America. So I think we need to be smart about how we're going to move forward together.

I want to expand the Earned Income Tax Credit, increase the education tax cuts. It was interesting as I started traveling around the country last winter. I would be in small groups with my supporters and a lot of my wonderful donors, some of whom are here today, and I'd go through my list of what I wanted to do as President and I would say I wanted to increase college affordability and people would nod and they would be in obvious agreement but if I said it in a gymnasium in front of 2,000 people in Concord, NH, they stood up and cheered and kicked the bleachers because it has become so expensive. We are shutting the door on college for a lot of worthy and motivated young people.

I believe we should tie the minimum wage to Congressional salaries, so that Congress can't get a raise unless working men and women do too.

We have to reform the Alternative Minimum Tax, and I give Congressman Rangel a lot of points for courage in trying to take this on because it will increase the tax rates on millions of New York taxpayers and millions of others throughout America just at a time when we need stimulus so we've got to deal with the AMT. It's a stealth-tax that most people were never meant to pay.

But, the growing concerns in our economy should prompt us to consider whether working families need more immediate assistance in the form of economic stimulus.

Just like the housing crisis, the Administration has been asleep at the switch as overall economic conditions have worsened. We need a President who will wake up every morning focused on keeping our economy on track. And if we wake up to the current economic forecasts, a vigilant president should be talking about the right kind of stimulus today. And by right kind I mean broad based. We have, as my husband and I often say, certainly benefited over the last seven years of this administration as we've seen the vast majority of Americans basically stall. So if we talk about stimulus lets talk about the right kind of stimulus.

More and more economic forecasters and even just families across America worry we may face an economic set of issues that will stall growth even more, hit much harder on the income and the assets of people who are living in what I call the "trap door economy" right now - one pink slip, one missed mortgage payment, one medical diagnosis away from falling through and losing everything.

That's why I have called for up to $5 billion in immediate assistance to help communities and distressed homeowners weather this foreclosure crisis. If we can help stabilize the patient we'll have a lot better chance of getting all of us healthy again.

I've called for $2 billion in emergency energy assistance for families facing skyrocketing heating bills this winter. We need to be aggressive in getting this assistance out fast to working families and seniors so that they can spend it and protect themselves.

These are initial steps and I believe we should be ready to take further steps if the situation deteriorates. We should do this in a way that makes economic common sense. In 2001, President Bush used stimulus as an excuse to force through long-term tax cuts for the most fortunate among us. The result was a weak stimulus that continued us on a path to higher deficits, ballooning debt, and increased borrowing from foreign governments.

This time around, let's make sure we get it right. Let's make the stimulus temporary and not an excuse for long-term fiscal recklessness. Let's focus on hard-working families. Let's support them because they're the most likely to really provide what the economy desperately needs - a jumpstart.

The Administration was asleep at the switch but we can't wait until we have a new President. We need to make sure we do everything we can to get this President and this Administration to take action.

And we need then to have a President starting in January 2009 who is ready to change our policies and lead our country. That means anticipating economic problems that may arise in the future and taking action to ameliorate or eliminate them. It means calling together immediately those who are stakeholders and decision-makers.

America is at its best when we work together. We haven't really been called to do that in the last seven years. Many of us in New York waited to be called for some kind of commitment, sacrifice, responsibility after we were so horrifically attacked on 9/11. The call never came. I think it was a missed opportunity of historic proportion.

What we need always to be ready to do is to respond as Americans. We need to start acting as our best selves again. We need leadership who will summon us to do that. And I'm calling particularly on those who are so able and so smart and so resourceful to help us find our way forward here. Don't wait for the Administration or Secretary Paulson to call. Call yourself. Make sure that you're part of this ongoing. It's the right thing to do for the economy, but even more importantly it's the right thing to do for America.